
===== PAGE 1 =====
Faculty Handbook
NOTE: This document reflects the Faculty Handbook as of October 16, 2025. The page at
https://faculty.gsu.edu/faculty-handbook/ will always have the most recent updates. A good faith effort
has been made to ensure that this document corresponds with the online handbook. Where the web
version and this document conflict, the web version takes precedence as the most recent version of the
handbook. Where this document or the online version of the handbook conflict with university policy in
its online policy library (GSU PolicyStat), the version listed online in PolicyStat supercedes the Faculty
Handbook.
Version Control: most recent update posted to the web on October 16, 2025.
Contents
Contents ...................................................................................................................................... i
About This Handbook .................................................................................................................. iii
100. Introduction to the University ................................................................................................ 1
University System of Georgia and the Board of Regents .............................................................. 1
Georgia State University Background and Mission ...................................................................... 1
Georgia State University Organization and Governance Structures ............................................. 3
200. Faculty Status and Progression ............................................................................................. 4
Overview .................................................................................................................................. 4
Faculty Status and Ranks .......................................................................................................... 5
Fundamental Tenets and Expectations of Faculty ...................................................................... 8
Reviews of Faculty Administrators and Department Chairs ...................................................... 12
Named Professorships ........................................................................................................... 14
Faculty Status after Retirement ............................................................................................... 15
300. Teaching and Student Interaction ........................................................................................ 16
Curriculum ............................................................................................................................. 16
Class Organization ................................................................................................................. 16
Class Materials ...................................................................................................................... 18
Student Registration and Attendance ...................................................................................... 19
Specific Faculty Responsibilities ............................................................................................. 22
Examinations ......................................................................................................................... 24
Grading .................................................................................................................................. 26
Evaluation and Assessment .................................................................................................... 27
===== PAGE 2 =====
Expectations Related to Student Conduct ............................................................................... 28
Services and Resources for Faculty ......................................................................................... 29
Services Available for Students ............................................................................................... 31
Alternative Instructional Formats ............................................................................................ 34
Emergency Procedures ........................................................................................................... 35
400. Research, Scholarship, and Professional Development ........................................................ 36
Overview ................................................................................................................................ 36
Resources for Research .......................................................................................................... 36
Research Policies ................................................................................................................... 40
500. Service Activity ................................................................................................................... 41
Overview ................................................................................................................................ 41
600. Personnel Policies and Benefits ........................................................................................... 42
Faculty Recruitment and Appointment .................................................................................... 42
Compensation and Benefits .................................................................................................... 46
Leaves and Absences ............................................................................................................. 51
Exiting University .................................................................................................................... 58
Key Employee Policies and Resources ..................................................................................... 60
INDEX ........................................................................................................................................ 77
This PDF version was formatted and edited in September 2024 on behalf of the Office of Faculty
Affairs by Jeremy Craig, Office of the Provost; last revised October 16, 2025. For questions about
the content of this handbook, email the Office of Faculty Affairs at AssocProvFA@gsu.edu.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook ii
===== PAGE 3 =====
About This Handbook
Georgia State University’s faculty members are integral to its success. Faculty members play a vital
and central role in creating the University’s thriving research culture and promoting the success of
its diverse students.
The Georgia State University Faculty Handbook provides new and continuing faculty members
ready access to two important kinds of information: 1) general information about the policies and
procedures that impact faculty, and 2) resources to support faculty. Please note that the Faculty
Handbook does not index all policies affecting faculty; there are other important policies and
procedures specific to the University’s colleges, schools, departments, and other units that should
be consulted as the need arises. This Faculty Handbook is not intended to create a contract
between Georgia State University and its Faculty or to set forth terms and conditions of
employment, but all faculty are responsible for complying with any and all Georgia State University
policies.
The Faculty Handbook shall be reviewed and updated annually. Any urgent changes necessitated
outside this annual cycle will be incorporated as soon as practicable. Although efforts are made to
update the Handbook in a timely manner, changes in Georgia State University’s policy and the
Board of Regents’ policy may become effective before they are indexed in the Faculty Handbook. In
the event that there is a conflict between the policies and procedures of Georgia State University
and the Board of Regents, the latter shall take precedence.
Please contact the Office of Faculty Affairs with questions about the Faculty Handbook or to report
a broken link/discrepancy at AssocProvFA@gsu.edu or 404-413-2688.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook iii
===== PAGE 4 =====
As of October 16, 2025 100. Introduction to the University
100. Introduction to the University
University System of Georgia and the Board of Regents
As one of the state-supported colleges and universities comprising the University System of
Georgia, Georgia State University is governed by the Board of Regents. The Board of Regents of the
University System of Georgia was created in 1931 as a part of a reorganization of Georgia’s state
government. With this act, public higher education in Georgia was unified for the first time under a
single governing and management authority. The governor appoints members of the Board to a
seven-year term and regents may be reappointed to subsequent terms by a sitting governor.
Regents donate their time and expertise to serve the state through their governance of the
University System of Georgia – the position is a voluntary one without financial remuneration. The
Board of Regents is composed of 19 members, five of whom are appointed from the state-at-large,
and one from each of the state’s 14 congressional districts. The Board elects a chancellor who
serves as its chief executive officer and the chief administrative officer of the University System.
The Board oversees the public colleges and universities that comprise the University System of
Georgia and has oversight of the Georgia Archives and the Georgia Public Library System. The
Constitution of the State of Georgia charges the Board of Regents with responsibility for
“government, control, and management of the University System of Georgia.” It has final authority
over all physical properties of the University System’s colleges and universities, over the offering of
courses of study and degree programs, and over employment of faculty and other System
personnel. State appropriations for the University System are requested by and are made to the
Board of Regents. Allocations of the appropriations are made by the Board.
Georgia State University Background and Mission
About the University
Mission Statement
Georgia State University Strategic Plan
Georgia State University Fact Book
Georgia State University Campus Master Plan
History of the University
An enterprising, urban R-1 university, Georgia State has transformed continuously during the
century since its founding. Georgia State University’s history began in 1913 when it was founded as
the Georgia Institute of Technology’s “Evening School of Commerce.” Holding classes in rented
space in downtown Atlanta, the School moved its location several times during its earliest years to
accommodate increasing enrollment. Wayne S. Kell, a distinguished member of the Georgia Tech
staff, directed the School, and Kell Hall is named in his honor. He was succeeded by several
directors, including, in 1928, Dr. George M. Sparks, who later served as the first president and
whose contributions are honored through Sparks Hall.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 1
===== PAGE 5 =====
As of October 16, 2025 100. Introduction to the University
When the reorganization of state government created a Board of Regents to govern the University
System of Georgia, the Regents made the Georgia Tech Evening School of Commerce an
independent college in the new System—the Tech School of Commerce. Independent throughout
the Depression and World War II, in 1947 the institution was incorporated by the Board of Regents
into the University of Georgia as the “Atlanta Division of the University of Georgia.”
By 1955, the Board of Regents realized that the Atlanta Division was acquiring a unique identity of
its own. The Regents separated Georgia State from the University of Georgia; and because its
specialty was to be business, it was given the title “the Georgia State College of Business
Administration.” By 1961, the institution had expanded its mission, and the Board of Regents
accordingly renamed it “Georgia State College.” This expansion, led by President Noah Langdale, Jr.,
added to the undergraduate business degree the bachelor of arts degree, the bachelor of science
degree, and the master of business administration degree. These additions were joined by other
master’s degrees and doctoral programs, with the first doctorate being conferred upon a student in
1965. Langdale’s leadership as the second president of the institution is commemorated through
Langdale Hall. In 1969, in recognition of the institution’s academic advances and the expanding
services it offered to students and the community, the Board of Regents changed the name to
Georgia State University.
As advanced degree programs increased, colleges were added, reorganized, and renamed over the
next decades, resulting in the current college structure. Overseeing this continued expansion of
Georgia State’s academic mission were Langdale’s successors as president: Dr. William M. Suttles
(1987-89), Dr. John Michael Palms (1989-1991), Dr. Sherman Day (1991-1992), Dr. Carl V. Patton
(1992-2008), and Dr. Mark Becker (2008-2021).
Georgia State’s current President, Dr. M. Brian Blake, assumed this leadership role in 2021. Under
President Blake’s leadership, Georgia State University has set several new milestones. With its
increasing reputation, the university received the largest number of applications ever for admission
to its Fall 2023 entering class. In the same year, the research enterprise exceeded $200 million in
sponsored awards – the highest in history. Dr. Blake oversaw the acquisition of more than $60
Million in government support for a new 120,000 square foot Research Tower that will break ground
in 2024 and open in 2026. In FY ‘22, the university also raised a one-year amount of more than $107
Million in philanthropic gifts for the first time in history. An advocate for campus experience, Dr.
Blake is leading the effort to establish new interconnected green spaces and enhanced facilities to
activate the center of Georgia State’s downtown campus.
Georgia State has become an enterprising public research university in the heart of Atlanta and a
national leader in graduating students from diverse backgrounds. With an entrepreneurial mindset,
Georgia State delivers both cutting-edge research and exceptional attention to the success of its
students. It is a thriving R-1 university that offers modern research facilities, numerous institutes,
multidisciplinary centers, and cluster hires in key areas of funded research to provide a challenging
and collaborative intellectual environment for its faculty and students. Fostering an urban
laboratory, Georgia State develops corporate, government, non-profit, and community partnerships
to fuel both research and creative work and provide these experiences for its students. Georgia
State supports it students by combining personal attention with innovative approaches to student
learning.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 2
===== PAGE 6 =====
As of October 16, 2025 100. Introduction to the University
Growing opportunities for community engagement, signature learning experiences, freshman
learning communities, student research, and expanded on-campus student housing combine with
cutting-edge advising using the latest techniques in data analytics to make Georgia State a national
leader in graduating students from diverse socioeconomic, racial, ethnic, and geographic
backgrounds. With the consolidation with Georgia Perimeter College approved by the Board of
Regents in January 2016 and operationalized beginning with Fall 2016 classes, Georgia State
University now serves over 50,000 students and sustains Perimeter’s commitment to increasing
access to higher education.
Today, Georgia State proudly carries the Carnegie Classification’s R1 “highest research activity”
designation and ranks as one of the nation’s leading institutions for quality undergraduate teaching
and commitment to student success. Its diverse, talented, and committed faculty have been, and
will continue to be, essential to Georgia State’s nationally recognized accomplishments.
Georgia State University Organization and Governance
Structures
Office of the President
Administrative Organization (Organization of the VP offices)
Office of the Provost
Academic Organization (Organization of the Office of the Provost)
University Statutes
Administrative Council
University Senate
Senate Bylaws
Staff Council
Student Government Association
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 3
===== PAGE 7 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
200. Faculty Status and Progression
Overview
This section addresses various faculty statuses, basic expectations regarding faculty work, and
faculty evaluation processes. More detailed information about expectations for faculty work in the
areas of teaching, research, and service is provided in sections Section 300, Section 400, and
Section 500, respectively. For information about faculty recruitment, appointment, leaves, and
other specific employment policies governing a broad range of faculty work, please see Section
600.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 4
===== PAGE 8 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
Faculty Status and Ranks
University Faculty Membership
As specified in the University Statutes Article V Section 1, University Faculty membership consists
of full-time professors, associate professors, assistant professors, principal senior lecturers, senior
lecturers, lecturers, clinical professors, clinical associate professors, clinical assistant professors,
clinical instructors, research professors, research associate professors, research assistant
professors, professors of practice, academic professionals, and instructors, who do not hold
temporary, limited-term, part-time, or visiting appointments. It also includes the President,
administrative and academic deans, and Dean of Libraries. Duly certified librarians are members of
the University Faculty.
Membership in the Georgia State University faculty is consistent with the Board of Regents policy
on Faculty Membership.
Full-Time Faculty
Full-time faculty include those faculty members with appointments from 0.75 to 1.0 FTE, regardless
of employment status (i.e., regular or limited-term).
The ranks of tenured and tenure-track faculty are Assistant Professor, Associate Professor,
Professor, and, in Perimeter College only, Instructor. The ranks and positions of promotion-eligible
full-time non-tenure track faculty are elaborated in the Georgia State University Promotion Manual
for Non-Tenure Track Faculty. Non-promotion-eligible full-time non-tenure track faculty are
Professors of Practice, Experts in Residence, and Full-Time Instructors at the Downtown campus.
For additional details regarding non-tenure track faculty, please see the Board of Regents Policy
Manual 8.3.8.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 5
===== PAGE 9 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
Transfer from a Tenure-Track Position to a Non-Tenure Track Position
As specified in the USG Academic & Student Affairs Handbook Section 4.1, USG Institutions can
establish professional positions designated as non-tenure track. Institutional presidents have the
authority to convert a non-tenure track position to a tenure track position and to convert a tenure
track position to a non-tenure track one. However, the transfer of an individual in a tenure track
position to a non-tenure track position must be done on a voluntary basis only. In the event of such
transfer, a statement from the faculty member confirming that this is a voluntary action must be
included in the approval request to Faculty Affairs.
Part-Time Faculty
Part-time faculty include those faculty members with appointments up to and including .74 FTE.
This includes partial benefits eligible faculty, part-time instructors, and adjunct faculty.
Partial Benefits Eligible Faculty
Partial benefits eligible faculty, which will include part-time faculty, are those faculty who are
employed for the academic year for .5 FTE to .74 FTE. They do not earn probationary credit toward
tenure and are non-tenure track. Temporary faculty and visiting faculty are included when employed
at less than .75 FTE.
Part-Time Instructors
As specified in the University Statutes Article XII Section 22, persons of learning and ability in
special fields may be employed on a part-time basis with academic titles, but they shall not be
entitled to faculty rank, tenure, or voting rights in the faculty.
Part-time instructors are employed to teach on a per-course/per-semester basis. Part-time
instructors are subject to reappointment each year.
In compliance with the Board of Regents’ policy, Georgia State University has adopted the following
policy for the term of employment for part-time instructors:
1. Part-time instructors are not eligible for promotion or tenure consideration.
2. Part-time instructors are employed to teach on a per-course/per-semester basis within a
designated academic department. Permission to teach in more than one academic
department must be approved by each department chair and dean(s).
3. Part-time instructors are non-contractual and are employed on a per-semester and per-
course basis. Part-time instructors hold their employment at the discretion of the President,
or Chief Academic Officer, and their immediate supervisor without a written contract. Either
of the above-named individuals may discontinue the employment of such employees
without cause or advance notice.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 6
===== PAGE 10 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
All recommendations for faculty appointments originate with the department chair and are
recommended to the dean of the appropriate college for approval by the Provost and Vice President
for Academic Affairs and the President.
The teaching load for part-time instructors is limited to two classes per semester. Any exceptions to
this policy must be approved by the Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs through the
academic department chair and the appropriate dean.
For system-level policy and procedures pertaining to part-time instructors, please see
the University System of Georgia Academic & Student Affairs Handbook.
Adjunct Faculty
Adjunct faculty are authorized to teach within a designated academic department and, although
they may be employed by the University, are not paid for instructional duties. They hold one of the
Board-approved adjunct faculty ranks (i.e., Lecturer, Senior Lecturer, Instructor, Assistant
Professor, Associate Professor, and Professor). All individuals in this category are not eligible for
tenure.
For clarification of the differences between adjunct, joint, and courtesy appointments, see Section
600.
Graduate Faculty Membership
Please see the University’s policy on Graduate Faculty Membership.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 7
===== PAGE 11 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
Fundamental Tenets and Expectations of Faculty
Academic Freedom
As specified in the University Statutes Article XII Section 16, all faculty members are entitled to
enjoy and to exercise, without penalty for such exercise, all the rights of an American citizen as well
as the rights of academic freedom as they are generally understood in the teaching profession. For
more information, see the university Freedom of Expression Policy.
Professional Standards
Faculty are expected to comply with the University System of Georgia Ethics Policy. This policy
focuses on core values of integrity, excellence, accountability, and respect. This policy includes a
code of conduct that specifies that USG employees will:
• Uphold the highest standards of intellectual honesty and integrity in the conduct of
teaching, research, service and grants administration.
• Act as good stewards of the resources and information entrusted to our care.
• Perform assigned duties and professional responsibilities in such a manner so as to further
the USG mission.
• Treat fellow employees, students and the public with dignity and respect.
• Refrain from discriminating against, harassing or threatening others.
• Comply with all applicable laws, rules, regulations and professional standards.
• Respect the intellectual property rights of others.
• Avoid improper political activities as defined in law and Board of Regents Policy.
• Protect human health and safety and the environment in all USG operations and activities.
• Report wrongdoing to the proper authorities; refrain from retaliating against those who do
report violations; and cooperate fully with authorized investigations.
• Disclose and avoid improper conflicts of interest.
• Refrain from accepting any gift or thing of value in those instances prohibited by law or
Board of Regents policy.
• Not use our position or authority improperly to advance the interests of a friend or relative.
To assist faculty in carrying out their work in accordance with this code of conduct, several more
specific policies are incorporated in this handbook and are hyperlinked through the list above.
Additional information about the Ethics Policy and Ethics Training is available in Section 600.
Faculty Duties and Responsibilities
Broadly defined, faculty fulfill three primary functions at Georgia State University: teaching,
research, and service.
Teaching and Advising
Faculty members with assigned workload in teaching are expected to provide instruction and
student advising as assigned by their department chair. Other activities that fall within the broad
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 8
===== PAGE 12 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
category of “teaching” include professional librarianship for faculty appointed as librarians and
counseling for faculty appointed as counselors.
Classroom instruction responsibilities include holding class for the entire period for which the
class is scheduled (including the final examination period) and evaluating students’ work and
assigning grades within the policies of the University and Board of Regents to students officially
enrolled in the class. Participation in assessment activities is another important component of
teaching. Faculty teaching workload may require faculty to teach in multiple modalities as assigned
by the department chair, including teaching face-to-face, hybrid, and online to fit department and
student needs; directing theses and dissertations; advising and mentoring students; and other
activities as defined by each college.
Georgia State is largely an in-person institution that stresses and recognizes the importance of in-
person learning. Most teaching responsibilities will require on-campus presence regardless of
class modality assigned.
A faculty member is expected to be reasonably available to those with whom they interact in
performing faculty activities. Although many faculty maintain irregular schedules and perform
many activities away from the University, each faculty member is expected to conduct faculty
activities where students, staff, and other faculty may have reasonable access to the faculty
member as well as to be available on campus as needed, required, or deemed appropriate.
Other duties and responsibilities included under teaching are:
• Attending all classes and arranging for class coverage when it is anticipated that the faculty
member will not be present in the classroom.
• Holding regular office hours as stated in the course syllabi in compliance with the GSU
Course Syllabus Policy.
• Advising students concerning program requirements and related courses.
• Graduate student activities, including thesis and dissertation advising, research and
teaching advising (GRA/GTA), and acting as program and curriculum advisors.
• Implementing student disability accommodations that are approved by the University in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act (2008) and Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
• Handling student information in accordance with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act (FERPA).
• Complying with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (“Title IX”), a federal civil
rights law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex (including pregnancy, childbirth,
and parental status) in educational programs and activities that receive federal funding. A
student seeking an adjustment due to pregnancy or childbirth should discuss the request
with their instructor. The instructor must grant certain adjustments required by Title IX.
• Retention of student work from academic courses, such as examinations, tests, term
papers, homework records, and grade books, for one term after course completion when
grade results are uncontested. When grade results have been contested, such records
should be retained for one term after course completion or until the grade appeal has been
resolved, whichever is longer.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 9
===== PAGE 13 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
For additional information about policies, expectations, and resources pertaining to teaching,
please see Section 300.
Research, Scholarship, and Creative Activities
Faculty members with assigned workload in research are expected to participate in scholarly,
research, and creative activities which enhance their professional development and contribute to
their disciplines. Faculty research workload includes but is not limited to publishing books, articles,
book chapters; conducting research; writing successful research grants; engaging in creative
activities such as performances and exhibits; conference presentations; and other activities as
defined by each college.
Other duties and responsibilities included under research are:
• Following Federal and State laws and University System and University policies and
procedures governing:
o External and internal sponsored funding and awards
o Protocols for use of human subjects (IRB) and animals in research
o Laboratory and Environmental Safety; Biosafety; Chemical Safety; Radiation Safety
o Use of university facilities, software, hardware, data and intellectual property, and
cybersecurity resources
• Maintaining objectivity in research and upholding the highest scientific and ethical
standards in accordance with Georgia State University’s Responsible Conduct in Research
guidance.
For additional information about policies, expectations, and resources pertaining to research,
please see Section 400.
Service
Faculty with assigned workload in service, as appropriate, on departmental, college, and University
committees. In addition, they make discipline-related contributions to professional organizations
or to the community. Faculty members perform University- related public service by conducting
continuing education courses, by providing consultation, and conducting applied research.
Service can take many forms however the expectation is that faculty members are reasonably
available to interact in-person.
For additional information about service, please see Section 500.
Additional faculty responsibilities articulated in the University Statutes Article XII Section 7 include
the responsibility to attend convocation in regalia.
Faculty Workloads
The University System of Georgia Board of Regents Policy Manual authorizes the academic
leadership of each institution to determine faculty teaching load (BOR Policy Section 3.1).
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 10
===== PAGE 14 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
The objectives of Georgia State’s workload policy are the following:
• To ensure workload equity among faculty with varying appointments and work
responsibilities;
• To allow flexibility at the college level for the development of workload assignments
consistent with norms for their missions and disciplines represented; and
• To ensure that there is sufficient effort directed to the needs of undergraduate and graduate
instruction.
Workload, as defined, includes any combination of the following activities:
Instructional Activities such as teaching face-to-face, hybrid, online, and other courses; directing
theses and dissertations; advising and mentoring students; and other activities as defined by each
college1.
Research/Creative Activities such as publishing books, articles, book chapters; conducting
research; writing successful research grants; engaging in creative activities such as performances
and exhibits; conference presentations; and other activities as defined by each college.
Service Activities such as service to the department, college, university, discipline, and community
as specified by each college.
At Georgia State, the workloads of faculty members will be based on their college and appointment
type. Each GSU college will develop a workload policy for its faculty that addresses the following:
1. Considerations governing teaching load assignment by faculty appointment type, including:
a. The number of courses taught per academic year;
b. The criteria for determining a faculty member’s teaching load; and
c. Acceptable reasons for teaching loads at variance with the norm.
2. Considerations governing research load expectations by faculty appointment type; and
3. Considerations related to service workload assignment by appointment type.
Once fully accepted at the college level, approval of and subsequent changes to college workload
policies must be reviewed by a committee jointly appointed by the Chair of the University Senate
Executive Committee and the Provost, and approved by the Provost.
Click here to view the Faculty Workload Policy.
Annual Evaluations
Consistent with the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.3.5.1 and the University Statutes Article XII
Sections 11 and 12, each faculty member at Georgia State University shall be evaluated at least
once annually in writing by the immediate supervisor on the basis of scholarly attainment and
professional growth as evidenced by (a) teaching activity and effectiveness; (b) research,
publication, creative scholarly activity, or artistic performance; and (c) institutional and
professional service activities, consistent with the faculty member’s responsibilities.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 11
===== PAGE 15 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
To ensure a measure of procedural uniformity within the University System, the Chancellor has
directed that the following steps be part of all evaluation systems (see USG Academic & Student
Affairs Handbook 4.7:
A. the immediate supervisor will discuss with the faculty member in a scheduled conference
the content of that faculty member’s annual written evaluation;
B. the faculty member will sign a statement to the effect that he/she has been apprised of the
content of the annual written evaluation;
C. the faculty member will be given a specific period of time to respond in writing to the annual
written evaluation, with this response to be attached to the evaluation.
D. the immediate supervisor will acknowledge in writing his/her receipt of this response,
noting changes, if any, in the annual written evaluation made as a result of either the
conference or the faculty member’s written response. This acknowledgment will also
become a part of the records.
Annual written evaluations [of faculty holding joint appointments] will be required in both the
primary and other unit(s). The other unit(s) will forward a copy of the evaluation(s) to the head of the
faculty member’s primary unit and to the faculty member. The evaluation process will conform to
the policies and procedures of the University.
Each year, faculty use the Digital Measures–Activity Insight 101 online portal to create their “GSU
Annual Report” to be used in the annual departmental evaluation process. Faculty needing
assistance with Digital Measures should contact their Chair or Dean’s Office.
Policies on Promotion and/or Tenure
Please consult the manuals available in GSU PolicyStat:
Promotion and Tenure Manual
Non-Tenure Track Faculty Promotion Manual
Reviews of Faculty Administrators and Department Chairs
Administrator Reviews by the University Senate
Regular evaluations of faculty administrators, up to and including the President, are conducted
according to the Georgia State University Statutes. Faculty members have the opportunity to
provide constructive input through these evaluation processes.
The schedule and procedures for the evaluation of the President, Provost, Vice Presidents,
Associate Provosts, Deans and Associate Deans can be found through the University Senate
Faculty Affairs Committee webpage. The evaluation of these administrators is provided for by
the University Statutes Article IX.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 12
===== PAGE 16 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
Evaluation of Department Chairs
Department chairs are evaluated in accordance with the University Statutes Article XI, and faculty
input is part of their evaluation process. As outlined in University Senate Resolution, “The chairs of
departments shall be evaluated formally every three years in accordance with the provisions of the
University Statutes. The main purpose will be to evaluate, maintain, and improve the performance
of the chairs. The procedures for evaluation will be developed by the dean in consultation with the
appropriate elected faculty committees, and approved by the faculty of the college. In addition, the
dean shall conduct an annual review of the chairs. Findings of either review may lead to a
recommendation for re-affirmation and suggestions for improvement or for a non-reappointment”
(University Senate Resolution, October 27, 1988).
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 13
===== PAGE 17 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
Named Professorships
Distinguished University Professorships
Please see the details of the Distinguished University Professorship nomination process.
Regents' Professors
Please see details of the Regents’ Professorship nomination process.
Endowed Academic Positions
As specified in the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.3.2.3, no endowed chair, professorship,
fellowship, or administrative position will be established or announced without prior approval of the
Board of Regents, and no initial appointment will be made to a chair, professorship, fellowship, or
administrative position without prior approval by the Board. Please consult the Board of Regents
Policy Manual for additional details about the procedures for approval, the categories of endowed
academic positions, and suggested minimum endowment levels for each type of endowed
position, and ways in which endowed fellowships may be used to provide temporary support for up
to one academic year for institution faculty or visiting scholars.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 14
===== PAGE 18 =====
As of October 16, 2025 200. Faculty Status and Progression
Faculty Status after Retirement
Retirement and Emeriti Status
As specified in the Board of Regents Policy 2.11, a president may, at his/her discretion, confer the
title of emeritus/a on any retired faculty member or administrative officer who, at the time of
retirement, had ten (10) or more years of honorable and distinguished USG service, provided,
however, that the title of President Emeritus/a may be conferred only by the Board of Regents on the
recommendation of the Chancellor (BoR Minutes, January 2009).
Membership in the Georgia State University Emeriti Association is automatic with the awarding of
emeritus/a status. Additional information about Georgia State University’s procedures for
nominating and recommending faculty for emeritus/a status is available at the end of
the Promotion and Tenure Manual.
For information about retirement, see section 600.
Part-Time Employment Beyond Retirement
An individual who has retired from the USG and is receiving benefits from the Teachers Retirement
System, the Employees Retirement System, or the Regent’s Retirement Plan, may be eligible for
reemployment on a part-time basis by the USG. Re-employment beyond retirement is governed
by Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.2.8.3.
For information about retirement, see section 600.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 15
===== PAGE 19 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Curriculum
Catalogs
The Enrollment Services Offices always offer the most up-to-date versions of the associate,
bachelor, and graduate student catalogs.
Policy on Courses Listed in University Catalogs
Please see the university Policy on Courses Listed in University Catalogs.
Development and Approval of Curriculum and Courses
As specified in the University Statutes Article X, Section 2, subject to the Bylaws and Policies of the
Board of Regents and to the policies of the University Senate on all matters affecting general
university policy, and subject to minimum requirements as may be established for the University,
the faculty of each college or school shall have the authority and duty to determine the entrance
requirements for its own students; to prescribe and define courses of study for them; to set
requirements for degrees, diplomas, and certificates.
Accordingly, departments periodically seek to initiate, alter, or discontinue academic programs.
Examples of programs include degrees or majors, minors, distance learning offerings, or core
curriculum courses. Faculty can learn more about the processes used to propose, review, and
approve curricular changes through the Senate’s Academic Programs Guide and through their
individual colleges.
Graduate Programs
Click here for information about graduate programs.
Class Organization
Course Syllabus Policy
Georgia State’s Course Syllabus Policy stipulates that all teaching faculty shall provide at or before
the first meeting of a class, each term, a copy of a course syllabus to each student in their classes.
Faculty members should consult the university-level Course Syllabus Policy and any college- and
department-level policy that may exist in order to ensure that their syllabi meet policy
requirements. Faculty are also encouraged to include in their syllabi information about student
support services to raise student awareness of services that can support their academic success.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 16
===== PAGE 20 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Academic Calendars and Final Exam Schedules
Click here for academic calendars and final exam schedules.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 17
===== PAGE 21 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Class Materials
Policy on Self-Authored Instructional Materials
To avoid any conflicts of interest, faculty members interested in assigning self-authored
instructional materials as required or optional materials for a course must receive written
permission from their unit head, following input from a faculty committee. Faculty should consult
the Policy on Self-Authored Instructional Materials and Compiled Instructional Packets to review
additional details.
Textbooks
Textbook and course material selection is the prerogative of the instructor except when
departments or colleges have selected textbooks for multiple-section or required courses. It is
important that faculty select textbooks and other course materials in compliance with
requirements for accessibility of the Americans with Disabilities Act, other applicable acts, and
their implementing regulations. See Accessible Course Materials below for relevant resources.
Textbook orders are handled through each department. As specific department practices vary,
faculty members should check with department administrative staff to understand the specific
department procedures and timelines for ordering textbooks, and to determine if any textbooks or
similar course materials are used across course sections through faculty committee, course
coordinator, or Program Director.
Use of Copyrighted Works in Education and Research
As part of the University System of Georgia, Georgia State University is governed by the Board of
Regents USG Copyright Policy. Faculty should review the Introduction to the Fair Use
Checklist when determining whether a given use of a work is a fair use. Faculty should complete
and retain a copy of the Fair Use Checklist for each “fair use” of a copyrighted work in order to
establish a “reasonable and good faith” attempt at applying fair use should any dispute regarding
such use arise.
Accessible Course Materials
Accessibility has been articulated as a high priority issue for the Board of Regents of the University
System of Georgia (USG). As web-based instructional materials play an increasing role not only in
online and hybrid courses, but also in face-to-face courses, all instructors should make the use and
creation of accessible documents and multimedia a priority. Doing so helps ensure that those with
disabilities, including but not limited to visual and hearing impairments, can access instructional
materials. Faculty members are encouraged to use the range of services provided by the Center for
Excellence in Teaching, Learning, & Online Education and the University System of Georgia to
create and provide accessible course materials.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 18
===== PAGE 22 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Faculty unfamiliar with the laws impacting the delivery of web-based content for institutes of higher
education should review the USG’s Accessibility Tutorial to understand the importance of using
accessible web-based instructional content in their courses.
Physical and Electronic Course Reserves
Please visit the University Library website for information about Physical and Electronic Course
Reserves.
Complimentary Textbooks
The distribution of complimentary textbooks is an important part of the process whereby professors
review the full range of instructional materials available for their courses. However, the integrity of
this process must be respected. Selling complimentary copies of textbooks adversely affects the
entire academic community. Professor-authors are deprived of economic return in royalties, and
incentives to write textbooks are diminished. Students generally do not benefit from the sale of
complimentary copies, as these books are sold at or only slightly below the new book price. Selling
complimentary textbooks inflates the cost of all textbooks, as publishers must compensate for
revenue lost from the sale of new books. Selling complimentary copies violates the tradition of
respect by professors for the intellectual work of their colleagues and for the textbook publishers.
The future of availability of complimentary textbooks may be seriously jeopardized by the
reluctance of publishers to risk further financial loss. Faculty members receive complimentary
textbooks as a result of their position at the University. These textbooks should not be viewed as a
source of faculty income. We recommend the following:
1. Complimentary textbooks are not to be resold for faculty profit. The books may be
maintained for faculty reference or contributed to a library for student reference.
2. Solicitors for complimentary copies are forbidden from campus.
3. The campus bookstore may not sell copies which are identifiable as complimentary copies
whatever their source may be.
(University Senate Resolution, February 2, 1989)
Student Registration and Attendance
Class Rolls
Class Rolls are accessed in PAWS or GoSOLAR. If a student is attending class but is not listed on
the class roll, the instructor may submit a request to add the student by submitting a Registration
Adjustment Request on PAWS. See details under the section ADD. Once the registration
adjustment request is approved by the academic department and processed by the Office of the
Registrar, the student will be added to the class roll, and the student’s attendance will
automatically update to “Attending” on PAWS. It is important that instructors verify each class roll
when requested by the Registrar’s Office. For each student listed, the instructor should provide
attendance information (Attending, Stopped Attending/Participating, last attendance date required,
or Never Attended/Participated). Instructors should be certain that a student never attended or
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 19
===== PAGE 23 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
does not intend to return before choosing Never Attended or Stopping Attending, as the Registrar
will drop or withdraw students after they have been assigned that selection.
Student Attendance
Georgia State University’s Policy on Class Attendance does not mandate the number or percentage
of student absences that are acceptable but suggests a guideline of 15% for determining an
excessive level of absence. The specific class attendance policies for each class are at the
discretion of the instructor, in accordance with the policies of the department and college. Faculty
should consult the Policy on Class Attendance to review additional details regarding various types
of absences due to university-sponsored events, legal obligations, religious observances, illness, or
death in the immediate family, as well as the required reporting of absence of veterans.
Accommodation for Religious Holidays
Many Georgia State University faculty, students, and staff observe religious holidays essential to the
practice of their faith. Georgia State endeavors to make it possible for all of its faculty, staff, and
students to observe their sincerely held religious beliefs and holidays without conflict with
academic requirements.
As per the GSU Code of Conduct’s Policy on Class Attendance, students must provide instructors
with reasonable notice of the dates of religious holidays on which they plan to be absent. Absence
for religious reasons does not relieve students from responsibility for completing their course work
and students must be given an equivalent opportunity to make up any missed work according to an
agreed-upon schedule. Such accommodations might include rescheduling an exam or giving the
student a make-up exam, allowing an individual or group presentation to be made on a different
date, letting a student attend a different section for the same class that week, adjusting a due date
or assigning the student appropriate make-up work that is no more difficult than the original
assignment.
Absence for a religious reason should be counted as an excused absence and should not be
counted against any other excused absences permitted by the instructor. Should a complicated
situation arise related to religious accommodations (for example, clinical rotations), contact your
department chair, dean’s office or the Office of Legal Affairs at 404-413-0500.
Adding and Dropping Classes
Students can add or drop themselves to classes during the first week of the fall and spring
semesters (Late Registration period) by using PAWS. After the the first week of classes and up to the
deadline announced each term by the Registrar (usually the third week of classes), instructors may
add students to their classes using the Registration Adjustment link in PAWS or GoSOLAR. The
student ID number is required. Faculty can assist students who are unfamiliar with procedures for
registering and dropping by directing them to the Registration Guide.
Withdrawal from Class
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 20
===== PAGE 24 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Current information about withdrawal from courses is available in these catalogs:
Withdrawal in Undergraduate Associate-Level Catalog
Withdrawal in Undergraduate Bachelor-Level Catalog
Withdrawal in Graduate Catalog
Auditing a Class
Students who wish to audit a course need to contact the Enrollment and Registration Services
Center to process an application for audit. Auditing is permissible only after prerequisite
requirements are met and by permission of the instructor. Tuition and fees will be assessed at the
same rate as for courses being taken for credit. More information about auditing is available
through the Registration Guide.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 21
===== PAGE 25 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Specific Faculty Responsibilities
Accommodations for Disabled Students (ADA)
Georgia State University is committed to providing educational opportunities for all students and
assisting them in making their college experience successful and positive. The Access and
Accommodation Center is designated to determine disability-related academic accommodations.
A student’s access to approved accommodations is a right under the Americans with Disabilities
Act Amendments Act (2008) and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Accommodations
provide students with an equal opportunity to an education. An instructor may not deny an
approved accommodation, as designated in the Letter of Accommodation that students are
required to show faculty when requesting accommodations in a specific course. For more
information, please see Access and Accommodation Center, which includes a Responding to a
Student’s Disability Reference Guide and helpful list of Faculty Do’s and Don’ts. As specified in the
Course Syllabus Policy, all syllabi should include the following statement: “Students who wish to
request accommodation for a disability may do so by registering with the Access and
Accommodation Center. Students may only be accommodated upon issuance by the Access and
Accommodation Center of a signed Accommodation Plan and are responsible for providing a copy
of that plan to instructors of all classes in which accommodations are sought.”
Student Records and FERPA
Faculty are expected to handle student information in accordance with the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) (20 U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 CFR Part 99), a Federal law that protects the
privacy of student education records. Unless a student is legally dependent, the university is
prohibited by FERPA from releasing student account information to a parent or guardian or other
unauthorized third party without the student’s consent. Faculty may not divulge grades, enrollment,
medical information, etc. to an unauthorized third party (including parents) without a signed waiver
from the student. Faculty can access additional information through Student Records/FERPA.
Students who wish to authorize an individual to have access to their student records should
complete the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act Waiver in the Dean of Students office.
Title IX Accommodations for Pregnant and Parenting Students
Georgia State University and its employees are required to comply with Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972 (“Title IX”), a federal civil rights law that prohibits discrimination on the basis
of sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, and parental status) in educational programs and activities
that receive federal funding. A student seeking an adjustment due to pregnancy or childbirth should
discuss the request with their instructor. The instructor must grant the adjustments required by Title
IX. For a complete explanation of instructor responsibilities and a list of frequently asked questions,
instructors should view the Employee Guidance Document. If a student has questions or needs
assistance, direct her to the Director of the Access and Accountability Center at 404-413-1560.
Further guidance is also available to students in the Student Guidance Document.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 22
===== PAGE 26 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Retention and Destruction of Student Work
Faculty should retain student work from academic courses, such as examinations, tests, term
papers, homework records, and grade books, for one term after course completion when grade
results are uncontested. When grade results have been contested, such records should be retained
for one term after course completion or until the grade appeal has been resolved, whichever is
longer. Before disposing of materials, remove all identifying marks, such as names or Panther IDs.
Plan to shred all documents before disposing. Faculty can find more information about records
retention at the USG Records Retention Schedules.
Information Systems and Technology Policies
The USG provides a handbook of technology use guidelines institutions should follow. Information
on USG requirements is updated frequently and be found on their Information Technology Services
website.
Additionally, GSU has a range of policies regarding the use of GSU technology resources. A few that
might be most helpful for teaching include:
• Email Access and Retention
• Ownership of Digital Educational Resources
• Guidance on Generative AI and Data Integrity, Privacy & Security
• Information System Ethics
• Student Computer Access
For more information on GSU-specific technology policy, visit the policy library and search for
information technology.
Please see Section 400 for research policies related to technology and Section 600 for general
workplace policies related to technology.
Faculty Attendance
When it is anticipated due to research or service activities that the instructor of record will not be
physically present in the classroom, faculty members should consult with their department
administrative staff to understand the department and college procedures and expectations
regarding options for providing class instruction.
For other circumstances impacting faculty attendance, such as illness, jury duty, medical leave,
and other types of leaves, as well as reporting of time, faculty should consult Section 600.
Office Hours
Faculty office hours are an important way for faculty members to provide individualized feedback,
advising, and mentoring to students at all levels. Faculty should establish, maintain, and
communicate their office hours as specified in the University Statutes Article XII Section 9, Course
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 23
===== PAGE 27 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Syllabus Policy, and any applicable college and department policies. Office hours must be stated in
course syllabi as specified in the Course Syllabus Policy. Faculty should consult with department
staff to identify other college and/or department policies or guidelines that may contain other
expectations regarding office hours, such as a minimum number of weekly office hours or
additional means of communicating these office hours to students.
Academic Advising
Academic advisement concerning program requirements and related courses is one of the
responsibilities of the faculty of the colleges. Accordingly, individual departments and colleges
deliver in-person and online advisement in ways suitable to each discipline. Additionally, faculty
should encourage students to use the services of the university’s Student Advisement and
Academic Support Center.
Examinations
Final Exams
A final examination is defined as an examination to be given during the scheduled time and day
after the end of classes for the term. The standard in-class final examination length is two and a
half hours. It is expected that a final examination will be given in each course as part of the
requirements for the course as stated in the syllabus, unless one of the following conditions apply:
A. departmental/college policy governs final examinations for the course;
B. the academic nature of the course does not warrant a final examination in the opinion of the
instructor;
C. an alternative form of examination to be completed after the end of classes for the term is
being given (for example, a “take home” final examination to be completed by students off
campus after the end of classes for the term).
The schedule of times and days during which such final examinations are to be given is in the online
Registration Guide. Those examinations which are designated on the course syllabus as in-class
final examinations must be given at the designated time during the final examination schedule
unless a change is authorized prior to the examination time by the dean (or designee) of the college
in which the instructor is teaching. After the Dean’s Office approves the request, a dean’s office
representative will communicate with the Office of the Registrar for a classroom assignment.
The instructor is responsible for taking reasonable steps to ensure the integrity of the examination
environment. Different approaches may be required to ensure the integrity of student assessment
in different venues, as appropriate for the learning objectives.
A student shall not be required to take more than two examinations within one twenty-four hour
period during the published final examination period. More than two examinations within twenty-
four hours are hereafter referred to as “clustered examinations.”
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 24
===== PAGE 28 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
A student is considered to have an inappropriate clustering of final examinations when more than
two examinations fall within twenty-four hours (e.g., examinations at 8:30 am, 11:30 am, and 6:00
pm on the same day, or examinations at 6:00 pm on one day, and at 8:30 am and 2:30 pm on the
following day); the student is not considered to have an inappropriate clustering of examinations if
the third examination in sequence begins at the same time on the subsequent day as the first
examination (e.g., 6:00 pm on one day, and 2:30 pm and 6:00 pm on the following day.)
Students who have three or more clustered examinations may request of one professor that the
examination be re-scheduled according to the following procedure:
A. If a final examination was re-scheduled and thereby created a “cluster,” the instructor of the
re-scheduled examination will provide a special administration for the adversely affected
student.
B. If one or more of the clustered examinations is a “common examination” with an
established conflict resolution time, the student will request to resolve the conflict by taking
one of the common examinations in the conflict resolution time. If two or three of the
examinations are “common examinations” the student may request which “common
examination” is to be re-scheduled.
C. If one of the clustered examinations is not a common examination or the result of re-
scheduling, the student will request to re-schedule the examination/s scheduled as the
middle examination/s. Except in extraordinary circumstances, the instructor is expected to
cooperate.
D. If the student is unable to arrange for one of the examinations to be re-scheduled, the
student is to request assistance from the Office of the Dean of his/her college. The
student’s dean (or designee) in consultation with the dean/s (or designee/s) of the courses
involved will designate the examination to be re-scheduled.
Once a student has taken an examination, he or she cannot request a re-examination on the basis
of this policy.
Details on final exams are available in these catalogs:
Final exams in Undergraduate Associate-Level Catalog
Final exams in Undergraduate Bachelor-Level Catalog
Final exams in Graduate Catalog
Testing Services for Faculty
The Counseling and Testing Center provides a wide range of testing services to the Georgia State
University community. Services include online testing and test scoring and scanning for university
faculty.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 25
===== PAGE 29 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Grading
Grading System
According to the Course Syllabus Policy, syllabi shall contain a grading policy that explains how the
final grade is to be determined with respect to the weights assigned to various course
requirements. When developing this portion of each course syllabus, faculty members should be
familiar with the letter grade symbols at Georgia State University and the policy that governs use
of plus/minus grading in courses, including multiple sections of one course. This policy also
explains the numerical value assigned to academic letter grades when a student’s GPA is
calculated.
Reporting of Final Grades
At the close of each semester, faculty must use PAWS or GoSOLAR to submit final course grades.
The Registrar provides detailed instructions for how to submit final grades. Final grades are typically
due by 5:00pm 1 or 2 business days after the last day of the final examination period. Faculty
should always consult the online Academic Calendar to confirm the exact grade submission
deadline for a particular semester or mini-mester. Timely submission of grades is essential for
students to graduate, transfer, register for courses with prerequisites, and have their financial aid
eligibility for the next semester determined.
The University considers student grades to be private information and prohibits the posting of
grades by name or social security number on bulletin boards or classroom or office doors.
Grades of Incomplete
For details about using and removing the grade of “I” (incomplete), please see the appropriate
catalog. The Enrollment Services office always offers the most up-to-date version of the associate,
bachelor, and graduate student catalogs.
Change of Final Grade
After official grading for the term has occurred, grade changes must be submitted by signing on to
the secured faculty portal on PAWS/GoSOLAR. The Grade Change Request Information Sheet and
the official link can be obtained through PAWS/GoSOLAR. For more information, including a small
number of exceptions to this process, please visit the Registrar’s Grading for Faculty guide. For
information about student-initiated requests for a change of grade, see the Faculty Handbook entry
for Grade Appeals below.
Grade Appeals
The policy and procedures for student-initiated Grade Appeals are outlined in the Georgia State
University Student Code of Conduct and Administrative Policies. Students are encouraged to
discuss concerns and disputes over final course grades with the instructor prior to filing a formal
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 26
===== PAGE 30 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
grade appeal, in an effort to gain understanding about the basis of his/her grade. Instructors are
encouraged to be available to students for such discussion regarding grades so that grade disputes,
to the extent possible, are resolved informally. In situations where such informal resolution does
not occur or is not successful, the student may appeal the final course grade to the Department
Chair.
The appeal must be in writing and describe the precise reason for the appeal. Faculty should review
the complete policy and procedures governing grade appeals as outlined in the Code of Conduct
and seek guidance on implementation from their department, college, or the Dean of Students.
Student Academic Complaints, Petitions, and Appeals
The policy and procedures for student complaints, petitions for waivers or variances of academic
policies, and appeals are outlined in the Georgia State University Student Code of Conduct and
Administrative Policies.
Evaluation and Assessment
Student Evaluation of Instruction
Please see the Policy on Student Evaluation of Instruction.
Assessment of Student Learning Outcomes
Student learning outcomes are assessed at Georgia State University in every degree and certificate
program at the undergraduate, professional, and graduate levels, and across the General Education
curriculum. Faculty play a variety of roles in the assessment of student learning outcomes in order
to use assessment results in the development and implementation of strategies for continuous
improvement in student learning. At the university level, assessment is overseen by the Office of
Academic Assessment within the Office of Institutional Effectiveness.
The Office of Academic Assessment offers one-on-one consultations and workshops for faculty
and staff involved in assessment as they develop assessment plans, collect and analyze
assessment data, report the findings of their assessment, and use assessment results for the
improvement of student learning. Faculty may also wish to review the Policy on the Annual
Assessment of Student Learning Outcomes.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 27
===== PAGE 31 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Expectations Related to Student Conduct
Student Code of Conduct
The university has established the policies and procedures that comprise the Student Code of
Conduct to both promote the university mission and protect the rights of Students, faculty and
staff. The official university rules and regulations are contained in the Georgia State University
General Catalog and the student handbook, On Campus. The most current version of the Student
Code of Conduct may be found online at codeofconduct.gsu.edu each semester. In the event of a
conflict between the Student Code of Conduct and other university policies, the most current
version of the Code governs. Examples of policies include General Conduct Policies and
Procedures, Academic Conduct Policies and Procedures, and Administrative Policies. For ease of
reference, commonly used policies are highlighted below.
Disruptive Student Conduct
In an emergency situation – such as if a student verbally or physically threatens to harm others or
makes an active suicide threat – faculty should call 911 or the GSU Police at (404) 413-3333. In non-
emergency situations involving disruptive students, faculty should follow the step-by-step process
outlined in the Disruptive Student Conduct in the Classroom or Other Learning Environment Policy.
Additional information and help can be accessed through the Dean of Students.
Academic Honesty
As members of the academic community, students are expected to recognize and uphold
standards of intellectual and academic integrity. To assist in maintaining this expectation,
instructors should be familiar with and follow the Policy on Academic Honesty, which includes
relevant university-specific definitions and step-by-step procedures for addressing issues of
academic honesty. The Policy on Academic Honesty, as well as the Notice of Academic Dishonesty,
can be accessed through the Dean of Students. As specified in the Course Syllabus Policy, all
syllabi should refer to the Policy on Academic Honesty.
Working with Graduate Students
The following two university policies apply to the supervision and evaluation of graduate assistants
as well as guide the mentoring relationship between faculty members and their students. Faculty
play a critical role in the evaluation of graduate teaching assistants and laboratory assistants.
Performance reviews of graduate teaching assistants and laboratory assistants are conducted in
accordance with GSU college or department policies on evaluating GTAs and lab assistants.
Supervision of Graduate Assistants (Graduate Assistant Policy)
Graduate Student-Faculty Advisor Relationships
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 28
===== PAGE 32 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Services and Resources for Faculty
Center for Excellence in Teaching, Learning, and Online Education (CETLOE)
With locations on all Georgia State campuses, the Center for Excellence in Teaching, Learning, &
Online Education (CETLOE) provides a wide range of programs to help all instructors, from first-time
graduate assistants to longtime faculty, use best practices of engaged teaching and learning.
CETLOE’s services span instructional support, iCollege and digital teaching tools, guidance in the
creation of online instructional content, certifications for professional development, graduate
student instructor services, and specialized learning environments and teaching equipment.
CETLOE delivers these services through online tutorials and FAQs, consultations, in-person
workshops, fully online workshops, faculty learning communities, facilitation of student feedback
on instruction, and reservation of specialized equipment and recording studios. CETLOE also
administers grants and awards to support Georgia State instructors pursuing innovative
approaches to teaching and learning.
GSU Learning Management System (iCollege) and Instructional Technology
iCollege is the learning management system used for academic courses at Georgia State
University. Instructors of record are encouraged to use iCollege to share syllabi, instructional
materials, grading feedback, and announcements with students. iCollege includes many other
robust features and integrated digital tools suitable for face-to-face, hybrid, and online courses.
These include integrated plagiarism detection and grading tools, monitoring software for online
test-taking, video capture software, and audio- and video-conferencing software.
Faculty can learn more about these tools through CETLOE’s Digital Teaching Tools page. Support
includes face-to-face and online iCollege support for instructors and online iCollege support for
students. Faculty should review guidelines and resources for creating accessible course
materials when using iCollege. Additional information about technology-rich learning spaces and
recording services is available through CETLOE’s Learning Design Services page
Classrooms and Classroom Management
Faculty can learn more about the equipment and technology available in a classroom in which they
have been assigned to teach by visiting Classroom Equipment & Software. Priority hotlines for
faculty experiencing technology problems while in class are: Downtown (404) 413-4321, Alpharetta
(404) 413-7777, and Brookhaven (404) 413-7800.
Faculty needing facility support for a classroom (temperature control, lighting, dry erase markers,
or furniture) should call (404) 413-0700. Classroom furniture should not be moved from one room
to another. The classrooms are set up with maximum seating for specific types of classes and
cannot be changed without adversely affecting other classes scheduled in the room.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 29
===== PAGE 33 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Classrooms are assigned to a class, not an instructor. If an instructor’s teaching assignment is
changed, the instructor is reassigned to another class with a designated room. The classes must be
taught in the classroom to which they were assigned. If a classroom is unsatisfactory, a request to
change the assignment should be made through the department chair. The Dean’s Office will
consider the need for an adjustment very carefully before requesting a change from the Office of
the Registrar.
Classrooms can be reserved by faculty, staff, and student organizations affiliated with Georgia
State University for special events as well as for academic and course-related purposes. Learn
more at Classroom Reservations.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 30
===== PAGE 34 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Services Available for Students
Faculty Role in Referring Students to Services
Faculty members can greatly assist students by directing them to the specialized services designed
to help students succeed. Faculty may encounter students in distress who can benefit from referral
to counseling services, or students who have not yet registered with the Access and
Accommodation Center. In addition to making such individual referrals, faculty members may
incorporate the resources below into their syllabus or online course site to assist students in
finding and using the many services available at Georgia State designed to support them.
Student Advisement and Academic Support Services
For information on student advisement and academic support services, please click here.
Student Campus Life Services
Student campus life services include Cultures, Communities & Inclusion, Greek Life, leadership
development programs, Student Victim Assistance, and many other programs. More information on
these programs and services is available through the Office of Student Engagement. Several
programs are elaborated in this section of the Faculty Handbook.
Disability Services for Students
The Access and Accommodation Center provides support to any student with a documented
disability who chooses to identify themselves to the center. Support services include assistive
technology, academic couching, note-taking, and lab assistance services.
Students with disabilities should register with Access and Accommodation Center, which provides
Letters of Accommodation after students have submitted required documentation. Access and
Accommodation Center representatives are also available at each Perimeter College campus.
Counseling Services
The Counseling and Testing Center provides a wide range of counseling, psychiatric and holistic
health services to support students as they work to reach their educational goals. The Counseling
and Testing Center is staffed by a multidisciplinary team of psychologists, psychiatrists, licensed
clinical social workers, licensed professional counselors, licensed marriage and family therapists,
a nutritionist, and health educators. Services and resources include counseling, a mind-body
clinic, a performance enhancement center, psychiatric services, and a substance use risk
reduction program.
Faculty with concern about a student in distress should follow the guidelines at Faculty and Staff
Consultation.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 31
===== PAGE 35 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Counseling and Testing Center staff members also provide assistance to faculty, administrators,
and staff in assisting students in distress, enhancing the learning process, and providing guest
lecturers for classes. In addition to workshops and presentations, the Counseling and Testing
Center staff are often called upon to consult with faculty or other university professionals about the
psychological and academic well-being of students.
Career Services
For information about career services, please click here.
Testing Services
The Counseling and Testing Center provides a wide range of testing services to the Georgia State
University community. Services include, but are not limited to, online testing, independent learning,
placement testing, national and university standardized tests, professional development
certifications and test scoring and scanning for university faculty.
Supplemental Instruction
Supplemental Instruction (SI) is a voluntary and free academic assistance program that uses peer-
led study groups to help students in traditionally difficult courses – those with low completion rates
(D’s, F’s, and W’s). SI sessions are led by Georgia State University students who excelled in the
course to which they are assigned. SI leaders attend the lecture and prepare activity-based SI
sessions that correspond with the material covered in class. These SI sessions help current
students re-enforce course material and acquire valuable study strategies. Students can learn
more about SI at Supplemental Instruction Information for Students.
Tutoring and Writing Support
Tutoring services are available for both Atlanta campus and Perimeter campus students. Students
in need of writing support can visit the Writing Studio on the 24th floor of 25 Park Place on the
Atlanta campus. For STEM tutoring, students on the Atlanta campus can visit the STEM Tutoring
Center at 587 Natural Science Center. Math tutoring is available to students in the MILE located in
Urban Life Building 301. For further tutoring opportunities, students and faculty should check with
their colleges and departments.
Library Services for Students
The University Library, which has facilities at the downtown and Perimeter campuses, provides a
wide array of services to support student success. In addition to giving students access to hard
copy and digital materials, computer labs, printers, and copiers, the University Library allows
students to check out laptops and reserve study rooms, visualization rooms, and other rooms with
audio-visual equipment. Research support for students includes research guides and citation
software.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 32
===== PAGE 36 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Financial Aid and Grants
For information about financial aid for students, please click here.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 33
===== PAGE 37 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
Alternative Instructional Formats
Online Courses and Hybrid Courses
Online courses and hybrid courses offered at Georgia State University assist in increasing student
access to higher education. These modes of course delivery offer both new opportunities and new
challenges. Therefore, faculty members teaching such courses should take full advantage of the
training and support offered by the Center for Excellence in Teaching, Learning, & Online
Education. Ranging from guidance in using sound pedagogical practices to assistance in using
many forms of instructional technology and multimedia, CETLOE’s many services include
certificates in online teaching, guidance on creating e-content, video and audio recording studios,
a proctored lab for online exams, assistance in creating accessible materials, and support for using
specific technologies.
Instructors teaching online and hybrid courses should familiarize themselves with recommended
practices and resources for creating accessible course materials and be aware that Atlanta
campus does not offer proctoring services, but faculty can request a proctored lab session for their
course through the Center for Excellence in Teaching, Learning, & Online Education. Additional
resources are available through Perimeter College Online for Georgia State University faculty
teaching in Perimeter College. Faculty teaching online and hybrid courses should note that
according to the Course Syllabus Policy, syllabi should state specific requirements for attendance
including requirements for the frequency and kind of participation by designated channels.
Signature Experience Courses
Signature Experience courses are courses in which “students are encouraged to be active in their
own education.” In the context of an academic course, students participate in experiences that go
beyond traditional classroom experiences, such as simulations, academic internships, field
experiences, clinical experience, research, or study abroad. Signature Experience courses are
offered in 6 areas at Georgia State: art, city, global, professional, research, and service. Faculty can
learn more about experiential learning at Signature Experience.
Study Abroad
Georgia State University offers students a wealth of study abroad programs. This includes short-
term, faculty-led study abroad programs ranging from 1 to 5 weeks in duration. Faculty who
meet Study Abroad Program Director eligibility requirements and are interested in leading a study
abroad program should contact the Director of Study Abroad Programs for more information about
leading a short-term, faculty-led study abroad program.
Service Learning
Service learning is one of the many types of Signature Experience courses offered at Georgia State.
Service-learning provides students with the opportunity to become engaged citizens of their
communities and apply academic knowledge to hands-on experiences within the nonprofit and
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 34
===== PAGE 38 =====
As of October 16, 2025 300. Teaching and Student Interaction
community service sector. Engagement with the community offers students chances to connect
with underrepresented or vulnerable populations, and to broaden their understanding of complex
societal issues. For more information on service learning opportunities, visit the Office of Civic
Engagement.
Cooperative Education and Internships
The Cooperative Education and Internship program at Georgia State University is designed to
enhance the educational experience of students by providing them the opportunity to alternate or
intersperse periods of meaningful work related to their academic fields or areas of career interest
with periods of academic study. Cooperative education is a full-time, paid, rotational, field-based
experience that is a critical component of a student’s academic program. More information on
cooperative education is available through University Career Services. Internships are one of the
many types of Signature Experience courses offered at Georgia State. Internships are often part-
time (full-time during the summer), singular opportunities that can be paid or unpaid. Students
typically continue to take academic courses while participating in an internship. For help obtaining
internship opportunities, visit University Career Services.
Emergency Procedures
Faculty should be prepared to assist students in an emergency. A useful resource is the Quick
Emergency Action Guide for Faculty. Faculty should review emergency procedures with students
and direct them to the corresponding Emergency Guide for Students in the course syllabus or
course site. Additional information about preparing for and responding to emergencies can be
found at the Office of Emergency Management. The campus emergency information line is 404-
413-EMER (3637).
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 35
===== PAGE 39 =====
As of October 16, 2025 400. Research, Scholarship, and Professional
Development
400. Research, Scholarship, and Professional
Development
Overview
This section addresses many university-level policies and resources pertaining to research,
scholarship, and professional development. The university values all types of faculty scholarship,
including scholarship of discovery, integration, teaching and learning, and engagement.
Several units at the university level provide support and guidance to faculty in the areas of research,
scholarship, and professional development. Of these units, University Research Services and
Administration (URSA) is fully dedicated to providing resources, policies, and procedures to guide
and govern research at Georgia State University. Faculty should review the university-level policies,
procedures, and resources that are provided by URSA and other university-level units and are
introduced in this section. Faculty should also inquire with their departments and colleges to
determine if any additional documents (such as college- or department-level policies and
procedures) govern their research, scholarship, and professional development activities. Faculty
should inquire with their departments and colleges to identify any additional resources that may be
available to support their research, scholarship, and professional development at Georgia State.
Resources for Research
Internal Funding Opportunities
Internal funding opportunities for research and scholarship are provided by numerous offices at
Georgia State. In addition to exploring opportunities that may be provided by your college or
department, review the Internal Grants Program run by University Research Services and
Administration (URSA) and the Provost’s Faculty Fellowship Program managed by the Office of
Faculty Affairs.
Finding External Funding Opportunities
University Research Services and Administration (URSA) provides a robust entry point to Finding
Funding for Research. There you will find quick access to federal, state, local, and non-profit
funding databases; lists of federal and non-federal funding agencies that have provided the most
funding to Georgia State investigators; and a link to sign-up for biweekly funding opportunity
announcements organized by general discipline area. In addition, the University Library offers
online resources to help you use the PIVOT funding database effectively.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 36
===== PAGE 40 =====
As of October 16, 2025 400. Research, Scholarship, and Professional
Development
Proposal Development and Submission Resources (Office of Sponsored Proposals
and Awards)
When developing and preparing to submit a proposal to any external funding agency, work with the
appropriate representative of the Office of Sponsored Proposals & Awards (OSPA), who will help
you with proposal preparation. Note that all sponsored projects must be processed through the
Office of Sponsored Programs & Awards. A sponsored project is any activity funded by an external
agency to accomplish a defined scope of work or set of objectives. If you have any questions about
whether you are proposing a sponsored project, please contact your OSPA representative, available
through the link above.
OSPA offices are located on the 3rd Floor at 58 Edgewood Avenue, adjacent to the T Parking Deck,
and are open from 8:30 AM to 5:15 PM Monday through Friday. OSPA representatives are available
for assistance—walk-in, e-mail, telephone—throughout those business hours.
To help faculty in the proposal development and submission process, University Research Services
and Administration (URSA) also provides robust online assistance through step-by-step guides to:
Prepare a Proposal
Develop a Proposal Budget
Route a Proposal for Approval
Management of Awards
Faculty work with University Research Services and Administration (URSA) representatives and staff
in other units to accept, manage, and close-out awards from external funding agencies.
To learn more about how these award phases are handled at Georgia State, commonly used and
misunderstood terms, and procedures related to common activities such as hiring personnel,
paying personnel, purchasing equipment, modifying an award, and many others, consult the robust
online assistance that University Research Services and Administration (URSA) provides through
step-by-step guides to:
Accept an Award and Set Up Accounts
Manage an Award
Close Out an Award
Compliance and Safety Resources
University Research Services and Administration (URSA) provides many resources in support of
research compliance and safety. Faculty members conducting research in the areas below should
review the resources available to aid them in the areas of compliance and safety:
Human Subjects and Institutional Review Board (IRB)
Animal Care and Use
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 37
===== PAGE 41 =====
As of October 16, 2025 400. Research, Scholarship, and Professional
Development
Laboratory and Environmental Safety
Biosafety
Chemical Safety
Radiation Safety
Workshops and Online Training for Research
University Research Services and Administration (URSA) provides many in-person workshops and
training options to support faculty in conducting research. Support includes workshops on writing a
better grant proposal, finding external funding opportunities, and budgeting; an overview and links
are available through URSA’s Proposal Writing Resources. Compliance and safety training includes
Responsible Conduct in Research and working with humans, animals, and hazardous chemicals
and materials. Click here for the online starting point for research training.
University Library
The University Library, which has facilities at the downtown and Perimeter campuses, provides a
wide array of research services to support faculty. These include the Pivot grants database, citation
software, data management, scholarly impact tools, and open access research. The library
maintains a current list of such research-related services on the University Library Faculty page and
the Faculty Research Portal.
Research Technology/Computing
Research technology is provided by several units at Georgia State. University Research Services
and Administration (URSA) provides numerous technology and computing solutions to support
research. These include data capture and surveys, computing resources, secure storage of data,
data management plans, web/app development, data analytics, and cloud services. The starting
point for exploring URSA’s technology support services is http://ursa.research.gsu.edu/data-
capture/.
Through Technology Services, faculty can also download free software that has been licensed to
assist students, faculty, and staff with essential academic, research, business and other tasks.
Software spans quantitative data, qualitative data, citation software, and Adobe Creative Cloud. An
updated list of other technology services that faculty may find helpful in conducting research,
scholarly, and creative activity, such as VPN, cloud, and networked file storage, is available
at https://technology.gsu.edu/guides/it-resources-for-faculty-staff/ . Visit Technology Services
Training and Learning Resources for access to online and in-person training on these tools.
The University Library also offers technology services in support of faculty research through
their Data Services Team and CURVE: Collaborative University Research & Visualization
Environment, a technology-rich discovery space supporting the research and digital scholarship of
Georgia State University students, faculty, and staff by connecting them with unique visualization
hardware and software and the latest online research tools and services. Other technology services
include the Pivot grants database, citation software, data management, scholarly impact tools, and
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 38
===== PAGE 42 =====
As of October 16, 2025 400. Research, Scholarship, and Professional
Development
open access research. The library maintains a current list of such research-related services on
the University Library Faculty page and the Faculty Research Portal.
Accessing Institutional Data
Faculty access institutional data for use in research and grant proposal writing through the Office of
Institutional Effectiveness – specifically, two of its subunits, the Office of Institutional Research and
Decision Support Services. Faculty can find much useful institutional data in the Georgia State
University Fact Books, provided by the Office of Institutional Research. From Enterprise Data
Management and Analytics, faculty can access a wide range of data about enrollment, admissions,
grades, graduation, retention, curriculum, faculty teaching duties, and student housing through the
self-service modules IPORT and Argos. Faculty can make individual data requests for data not
found through these self-service modules by contacting DSS@gsu.edu. Faculty interested in
conducting surveys for research purposes should see the entry on Research
Technology/Computing above.
Research Centers
For information about research centers, please visit the University Research page.
Conference Travel
Travel for faculty members presenting work at scholarly conferences should be arranged using the
procedures indicated for Professional Travel in section 600. Faculty members should consult with
department staff to understand what resources may exist to support their scholarly travel and
identify appropriate ways to provide student instruction during such periods of travel. Faculty
considering travel to a country for which the U.S. Department of State has issued a travel warning
need to review and follow the procedures specified in the university policy on travel to countries
with travel warnings.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 39
===== PAGE 43 =====
As of October 16, 2025 400. Research, Scholarship, and Professional
Development
Research Policies
Faculty are expected to follow all policies and procedures relevant to their research. The most
exhaustive collection of university-level research policies is provided by University Research
Services and Administration (URSA). Additionally, widely applicable policies include:
• General Principles for Scholarly Integrity and Responsible Conduct of Research
• Intellectual Property
• Openness in Research
• Research and Scholarly Misconduct
• Postdoctoral Research Assistants
• Use of Copyrighted Works in Education and Research
• IRB Manual
• Human Subjects and Institutional Review Board (IRB)
• Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
• Laboratory & Environmental Safety
• Biosafety
• Chemical Safety
• Radiation Safety
• Get Started with a Proposal
• Develop Proposal Budget
• Accept Award and Set Up Accounts
• Manage Award
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 40
===== PAGE 44 =====
As of October 16, 2025 500. Service Activity
500. Service Activity
Overview
Service activities and expectations vary by department, college, and faculty appointment. Faculty
can locate details about service expectations in the Promotion and Tenure Manual, the Non-Tenure
Track Faculty Manual, and related college and department manuals.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 41
===== PAGE 45 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Faculty Recruitment and Appointment
Faculty Hiring Policy
Faculty members and academic administrators participating in faculty recruitment processes
should be familiar with the Faculty Hiring Policy.
Sponsorship for U.S. Permanent Resident Status & H-1B Specialty Occupation
Please see the university policy on Sponsorship for U.S. Lawful Permanent Resident Status & H-1B
Specialty Occupation.
Criminal Background Checks (Background Investigation Policy & Procedure)
For information on background checks, please see the USG page on Background Investigation
Policy & Procedure.
Required Pre-Employment Records
As outlined in the Faculty Credentials Guideline, each faculty member recommended for
employment must file a verification of highest earned degree with the hiring official who forwards it
to the Office of Faculty Affairs.
Other pre-employment records required of new faculty are incorporated into the New Employee
Hiring Packet that is distributed by the Office of Human Resources [link – https://hr.gsu.edu/] at the
time of hire and the New Faculty Onboarding Checklist.
Appointments to the Faculty
All recommendations for faculty appointments originate with the department chair and are
recommended to the dean of the appropriate college for approval by the Provost and Vice President
for Academic Affairs and the President. As specified in the University Statutes Article XII Section 2,
every appointment shall be made in accordance with the Policies of the Board of Regents and
solely on the basis of merit and the special fitness of the individual. In the appointment and
promotion of members of the faculty, special consideration shall be given to their teaching ability,
research ability, achievement, and general usefulness or promise thereof to the University.
Additional resources include the Faculty Hiring Policy and faculty hiring procedures posted by the
Office of Faculty Affairs.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 42
===== PAGE 46 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Appointment to the Graduate Research Faculty or Graduate Professional Faculty
Please see the university policy on Appointment to the Graduate Research Faculty or Graduate
Professional Faculty.
Limited-Term Appointments
As specified in the USG Human Resources Administrative Practice Manual, faculty who are
employed by Georgia State University on more than a short-term basis but are not hired through a
competitive search will typically be given a “term” appointment for one academic or fiscal year, and
may be reappointed for one (1) additional year, not to exceed a total duration of 2 years.
Courtesy Appointments
Courtesy appointments are intended for current Georgia State University faculty to have academic
connections in departments other than their own. A courtesy appointment carries no shared
money or workload, but is a named appointment only.
Adjunct Appointments
Appointments of adjunct faculty are made using the procedures posted on the Office of Faculty
Affairs website. For more information about adjunct faculty members’ employment and teaching
duties, please see Adjunct Faculty.
Temporary Appointments
As specified in the USG Human Resources Administrative Practice Manual, temporary faculty are
employed on a short-term basis through written appointment. They are not employed on an
academic year contract. If they are employed for more than one consecutive academic semester
for 30 hours or more, except when the Academic semester is combined with Summer semester
immediately preceding or following the Academic Semester, they shall be employed as Regular
Faculty. Temporary Faculty are non-benefits eligible. At Georgia State University, temporary faculty
include part-time instructors.
Part-Time Appointments
Appointments of part-time instructors are made using the procedures posted on the Office of
Faculty Affairs website. For more information about part-time instructors’ term of employment and
teaching load, please see Part-Time Instructors.
Dual Appointments
As outlined in the USG Human Resources Administrative Practice Manual, a dual appointment
occurs when a USG employee works at more than one USG institution. At Georgia State University,
dual appointments are made using the procedures posted on the Office of Faculty Affairs website.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 43
===== PAGE 47 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Academic and Fiscal Year Contracts
The academic calendar is developed by the Admissions and Standards Committee of the University
Senate and is adopted by the Senate. The University System fiscal year begins July 1 and ends June
30. All institutions in the University System of Georgia shall be on the semester system. The
academic year shall consist of two regular semesters, each not to be less than 15 calendar weeks
in length (minimum of 75 class days per semester, excluding registration and final examination
periods).
Academic Year Contracts
Academic year contracts are based on dates as established in the academic calendar. The form of
the contract is stipulated by the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.3.11. The beginning date for a
standard contract, which covers fall and spring semesters, is one week before the beginning of
class for fall semester. It ends on the date that grades are due for spring semester. The offer of
employment to academic-year-contracted faculty in the term not included in the academic year
contract shall be based on programmatic needs. Compensation for the term not included in the
academic year contract shall be based on the rate of pay of the previous year’s academic year
contract.
Teaching, research, and administrative assignments in summer term are at the discretion of the
department chair and the appropriate dean.
Fiscal Year Contracts
Administrative officers of the University, deans of colleges, and certain of their associates and
assistants as well as department chairs are appointed for the full fiscal year. Faculty members
whose work requires continuous service also may be employed on this basis.
Personnel Files
Appointment Papers
A faculty member has access to their official personnel files of the University, college and/or
department. Papers relating to the initial appointment of faculty are maintained by the college and
by the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs. The “Faculty Information Data Forms” and
“Verification of Highest Degree” are maintained by the College and by the Provost and Vice
President for Academic Affairs. The “Faculty Information Data Forms” are also maintained by the
Office of Human Resources. The Loyalty Oath and Security Questionnaire are maintained by the
Office of Human Resources.
Annual Review, Promotion, and Tenure History
Copies of annual review documents and promotion and tenure history are maintained by the
department chair and/or by the individual college or other academic unit.
Contract Documents, Fringe Benefits, and Tax
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 44
===== PAGE 48 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
All contract documents are maintained by the Office of Human Resources. Documents related to
health, life, and disability insurance (including statements of beneficiaries); retirement; social
security; Federal and State tax withholding are maintained in the Office of Human Resources.
Change of Personnel Records
When a faculty member has a change in personal information, such as address, phone number,
marital status, department location or educational data, they must complete a Personal Data
Change Form. Supporting documentation must accompany this form for marital status (marriage or
divorce) or name changes. This form must be submitted to the Human Resources HRIS and
Records Office in a timely manner for record update. Forms are available in the Office of Human
Resources.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 45
===== PAGE 49 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Compensation and Benefits
Consistent with faculty full-time equivalent (FTE) and type of appointment, faculty have access to
regular employee benefits. These include mandatory and voluntary retirement plans; health,
dental, and vision insurance; disability and life insurance; professional liability insurance; work-life
benefits; educational benefits; and discounts. An overview of these benefits, with links to current
information about mandatory and voluntary benefits packages, is available here.
Benefits eligible faculty are required to attend a benefits orientation when they begin employment
at Georgia State University; mandatory and voluntary plan options are reviewed during the
orientation. Detailed plan information is available to both new and continuing faculty through
the Human Resources Benefits Office.
Benefits Eligibility
Full Benefits Eligible: This is defined as 30 or more hours per week (.75 FTE and greater), which
applies to regular faculty and regular staff employees. Full benefits include all benefits in
accordance with University System of Georgia of Board of Regents policy.
Partial Benefits Eligible: This is defined as 20 to 29 hours per week (.5 FTE to .74 FTE). Partial
benefits eligible may apply to regular faculty and regular staff employees. Partial benefits include
retirement and pro-rated leaves.
Non Benefits Eligible: This is defined as 19 or less hours per week (.49 FTE or less), which applies to
regular faculty and staff employees. Non-benefits eligible also includes temporary faculty, staff
and student employees who may not work more than 1,300 hours in a 12 month period.
Beginning July 2017, the benefits effective date for newly hired or newly benefits eligible faculty and
staff will be based on the hire date. Benefits will be effective on the first of the month following the
hire date. However, if the hire date is the first day of the month; then benefits will be effective on the
hire date.
Benefits Enrollment
Faculty must elect benefits during their first 30 days of employment. Individuals who do not elect
benefits during the first 30 days of employment must wait until the next annual open enrollment
period, unless the employee experiences a qualifying life event. Typically, open enrollment is held
during the month of November, with coverage effective January 1 of the following year.
Employees must select a retirement program within their first 60 days of employment. Failure to
designate a retirement option within the first 60 days will result in default assignment to the
Teachers Retirement System of Georgia (TRS). Once assigned, such action is irrevocable and
without exception.
Continuing faculty should review their benefits elections on an annual basis and be prepared to
make any needed adjustments during the annual open enrollment period in November. If there is a
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 46
===== PAGE 50 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
qualifying life event, such as birth, death, marriage, or divorce, changes in certain benefits may be
made if the employee notifies the Benefits Plan Administrator within 30 days of the event.
Insurance Premium Payment during Summer and Non-Pay Status
Insurance premiums are paid via payroll deductions. Faculty summer insurance premiums are
payroll deducted in advance, with the costs spread out over the January through May paychecks.
Since summer premiums are pre-paid, no premiums are deducted from summer paychecks. If
employment ends at the conclusion of the academic year, coverage ends at the end of the month in
which employment terminates, and any withheld summer premiums will be refunded. Faculty who
expect to be in a non-pay status for any reason when insurance premiums are due should contact
the Benefits Plan Administrator to arrange for payment of insurance premiums. Non-payment of
premiums may result in cancellation of benefits coverage.
Compensation
Faculty on academic-year contracts receive ten monthly paychecks, August through May.
Compensation Policies
In determining faculty salary increases consideration shall be given to scholarly attainment and
professional growth as evidenced by each of the following:
a) teaching activity and effectiveness;
b) research, publication, creative scholarly activity, or artistic performance; and
c) University, professional, and public service activities (University Statutes Article XII, Section
11).
Recommendations for salary increments begin with the department chair in preparation of the
annual budget (University Statutes Article XI, Section 3, G) and shall be based upon and preceded
by the evaluation of faculty described in Section 200 of this Faculty Handbook.
To learn more about faculty compensation, faculty should also review the Board of Regents
compensation policies. These policies govern the criteria for determining entry-level salaries and
salary increases, salary for fiscal year administrative employees returning to an academic
appointment as a faculty member; summer school salaries; compensation in relation to research,
Saturday classes, and off-campus continuing education; and salary supplements from cooperative
organizations.
The Board of Regents receives an annual appropriation from the General Assembly for all phases of
its operations. This appropriation may be increased or decreased by the Legislature or the Governor
during the period of any fiscal year. Expenditures for operation of the University System are
therefore necessarily contingent upon legislative appropriations. In the event that the General
Assembly or the Governor at any time reduces the amount of funds appropriated to the Board, the
compensation of all employees and other operating expenses may as a consequence be
correspondingly reduced. It shall, however, be the intent of the Board to maintain current salary
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 47
===== PAGE 51 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
commitments in so far as possible to every employee, and the Board will exert its composite
influence and best efforts to that end (BR Minutes, 1976-66, p. 184).
Gifts and Gratuities
As specified in the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.2.18.4, an employee of the Board of Regents
shall not directly or indirectly solicit, receive, accept, or agree to receive a thing of value by inducing
the reasonable belief that the giving of the thing will influence his/her performance or failure to
perform any official action. The acceptance of a benefit, reward or consideration where the
purpose of the gift is to influence an employee in the performance of his/her official functions is a
felony under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-2.
A USG employee or any other person on his/her behalf, is prohibited from knowingly accepting,
directly or indirectly, a gift from any vendor or lobbyist as those terms are defined in Georgia
statutes (O.C.G.A. § 21-5-70(6) and 45-1-6(a)(5)b). If a gift has been accepted, it must be either
returned to the donor or transferred to a charitable organization.
A gift may be accepted by the employee on behalf of the institution subject to reporting
requirements of the Board of Regents. If the gift is accepted, the person receiving the gift shall not
maintain custody of the gift for any period of time beyond that reasonably necessary to arrange for
the transfer of custody and ownership of the gift.
For purposes of this policy a gift is defined as lodging, transportation, personal services, a gratuity,
subscription, membership, trip, loan, extension of credit, forgiveness of debt, advance or deposit of
money, or anything of value.
A gift shall not include:
1. Food or beverage consumed at an occasional meal or event, provided the value is
reasonable under the circumstances but in no event exceeds $100 per person.
2. Food, beverages, and registration at group events to which substantial numbers of
employees of an institution are invited.
3. Food, beverage, or expenses afforded employees, relatives or others that are associated
with normal and customary business or social functions or activities.
4. Actual and reasonable expenses for food, beverages, travel, lodging and registration
provided to permit participation in a meeting, demonstration, or training related to official or
professional duties if participation has been approved in writing by the Chancellor, the
President, or his/her designee.
5. Promotional items generally distributed to the general public.
6. Textbooks, software, and instructional materials to be reviewed by teaching faculty.
7. An award, plaque, certificate, memento, or similar item given in recognition of the
recipient’s civic, charitable, political, professional, private or public service or achievement.
8. Legitimate salary, honoraria, benefit, fees, commissions, or expenses associated with the
recipient’s non-public business, employment, trade, or profession.
9. Gifts from a person or entity who is neither a lobbyist nor a vendor as those terms are
defined in State Statutes, nor a student or patient at an institution.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 48
===== PAGE 52 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
10. Consulting fees, honoraria, or financial benefits from sponsors or foundations, received in
conformance with USG policies, institution policies, and Georgia law.
11. Gifts to or from USG foundations or other separately incorporated, charitable entities.
Benefits
Please see the Faculty Benefits page of the Office of Faculty Affairs website.
Workers' Compensation and Work-Related Injuries
All University employees are covered by workers’ compensation insurance, under the state of
Georgia self-insurance program. Workers’ compensation also provides benefits to an employee’s
dependents if the employee dies as the result of a job-related illness or injury. All work-related
injuries should be reported within 24 hours following procedures listed on GSU workplace posters.
Reporting procedures and forms are available through Workers Compensation.
Illness or injury that occurs while an individual is traveling may not be covered by workers’
compensation if such travel has not been submitted and approved in advance as business-related.
Employees should submit travel authorization paperwork any time they are traveling on University-
related business. See Professional Travel.
Voluntary Benefits
Please see the university’s webpage dedicated to Discount programs and Voluntary Benefits.
Work/Life Resources
Work/life resources are offered by several offices at Georgia State. Faculty-specific work-life
resources, such as tenure-clock stoppage and faculty leaves of absence, are managed by the
Office of Faculty Affairs. Human Resources’ wellness programs include yoga, meditation, fitness,
and health consultations. In addition, faculty can take advantage of child care resources and
fitness classes elsewhere on campus. An overview of these work-life benefits, with current links, is
available here.
Tuition Assistance
Please see Employee Tuition Assistance Program.
Faculty Auditing Courses
Georgia State University, with Board of Regents’ permission, allows the registration of faculty
members, including Emeriti members, in academic or laboratory courses on a space available
basis in AUDIT status without cost to the faculty member. Permission in all cases must be obtained
from the course instructor. The following provisions pertain:
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 49
===== PAGE 53 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
A. The faculty involvement in such courses may be at two levels:
1. Attendance: the faculty member attends classes in accordance with the class attendance
policy;
2. Participation: the faculty member attends classes in accordance with the class attendance
policy and the faculty member does the work of the course including tests, reports and the
final examination.
B. A record of satisfactory involvement, as determined by the course instructor, will be maintained.
Such record will be available to the faculty member for the purpose of establishing qualifications
for employment or for any legal purpose whatever, previous to or subsequent to retirement. No
record will be made of unsatisfactory involvement.
(Source: University Senate, May 7, 1987 Office of the Vice President for Academic Affairs)
Retiree Benefits
For more information on Retirement Benefits, please see the HR Retiree resources page.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 50
===== PAGE 54 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Leaves and Absences
Official Paid Holidays
Please see the current holiday schedule.
Vacation/Annual Leave
As specified in the Board of Regents Policy Manual, a faculty member employed on an academic
year (9-month to 10-month) basis does not earn vacation/annual leave. An academic year
contracted faculty member who teaches during Maymester and/or summer semester will not be
eligible to accrue vacation/annual leave for such service.
Faculty members working on a fiscal-year (12-month) basis shall accrue 21 working days of
vacation leave per year (1.75 days per month). The scheduling of such time must be coordinated
with the department head or other appropriate administrator. Faculty members on fiscal year
appointments of less-than-full-time accrue annual leave in proportion to their full-time
equivalency. Vacation/annual leave may be accrued up to a maximum of 45 days (360 hours). On
December 31st of each calendar year, each employee’s leave record shall be adjusted to reflect no
more than 45 days (360 hours) of accrued vacation/annual leave.
Faculty in positions funded by grants, sponsored projects, or other non-state sources must utilize
any such accrued time within the funded period for their position. The employee should furnish to
the budget unit head a written statement of understanding that vacation/annual leave time must be
taken prior to the end of the contract or grant period or it will be forfeited. A statement to that effect
is signed at the time of initial employment with the University.
Faculty members converting from a fiscal year appointment to an academic year appointment shall
be paid out their accrued vacation leave, subject to the forty-five (45) days (360 hours) maximum
payment restriction, at the time of conversion. (Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.2.7.1)
Faculty members on fiscal year appointments shall be paid for unused, accrued vacation/annual
leave (not to exceed 45 days) at the time of termination of employment from the University.
Vacation/annual leave should be reported as it is taken in the University’s Absence Management
System. Failure to report vacation/annual leave use may result in inaccurate records and could
result in overpayment that may be inconsistent with State law.
Faculty employed on an annual (fiscal year) basis should review the Board of Regents Policy Manual
8.2.7 for additional information regarding Leave policies.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 51
===== PAGE 55 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Sick Leave
Sick Leave with Pay
Both academic-year faculty and fiscal-year faculty shall accrue sick leave at the rate of one day (8
hours) per calendar month worked. Employees working at least one-half time but less than full-time
will accumulate sick leave in an equivalent ratio to their percentage of time employed. Temporary
employees, including student assistants, graduate assistants, part-time instructors, and regular
employees who work less than one-half time do not earn or accrue sick leave.
An academic-year faculty member who teaches or who conducts compensated research during
the summer may earn up to 2 additional days (16 hours) of sick leave. The additional benefit is
computed as 5.33 hours of sick time accrual for each 10 percent additional compensation
(maximum additional compensation is 30 percent, and maximum additional sick leave is 16 hours
for summer).
For uneven percentages, a proportional formula applies. For example, an individual who has
summer commitments totaling to 23 percent additional compensation would earn 23/30ths of 16
hours, or 12.27 hours, of additional accumulated sick leave.
Note: Only faculty members who are actually being compensated during the summer are eligible to
accrue and utilize sick-leave benefits during the summer. Academic faculty who are ill during the
summer but who are not in pay status for summer employment may not apply sick leave during that
time.
Sick leave may be granted for an absence at the discretion of the institution for any of the following
reasons:
• Injury, illness, or temporary medical condition/disability of the employee (including
pregnancy-related disability, which is not distinguished from other medical conditions), as
well as appointments for medical and dental treatment/consultation;
• Quarantine due to a contagious illness in the employee’s household;
• Illness, injury, or death in the employee’s family requiring the employee’s presence. Family
members in this instance include the employee’s spouse, children, brother, sister, parent,
grandparent, grandchild, in-laws in the same categories, or an individual who stood in loco
parentis for the employee or for whom the employee stood in loco parentis.
Absences for a serious health condition of the individual or an immediate family member may be
covered under provisions of the federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA).
All leave must be entered into the University’s Absence Management System. Faculty are
responsible for contacting their department chair or program director to determine appropriate
coverage for any missed classes.
Terminating employees shall not accumulate sick leave or be entitled to receive sick pay after the
last working day of their employment (BOR Policy, Section 8.2.7.2). Accumulated unused sick leave
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 52
===== PAGE 56 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
may be credited under certain conditions toward retirement benefits from the Georgia Teachers
Retirement System (TRS). Please see TRS Unused Sick Leave for more details.
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
Information about the Family medical Leave Act, Georgia State’s FMLA Policy, and associated forms
to request FMLA are available on the Human Resources Family Medical Leave Act webpage.
For assistance with FMLA, please contact Georgia State University’s Benefits Office.
Shared Sick Leave Program
The Shared Sick Leave Program provides a means for University employees to donate paid sick
leave to a shared leave pool to be used by fellow University employees who while on an approved
leave of absence experience a serious health condition or whose immediate family member
experiences a serious health condition (as defined by FMLA) that requires the employee’s absence
from work for a period of time longer than the amount of sick and annual leave available to the
employee. For more information about eligibility to receive shared sick leave, voluntary enrollment,
key definitions, and associated forms, please visit the Shared Sick Leave Program website. Georgia
State’s Shared Sick Leave Program is governed by the USG Policy on Shared Sick Leave.
Death in the Family
Faculty with regular appointments of half-time or more who have a death in the family may be
allowed to use accrued sick leave. Any leave in excess of five (5) days for a death in the employee’s
immediate family must be approved and charged to vacation. Validated documentation must be
presented to the supervisor upon return to work. The immediate family in this instance includes the
employee’s spouse, parents, children, siblings, stepchildren, grandparents, grandchildren, foster
parents, legal guardian, and in-laws in the same categories.
Faculty who work less than half time may be granted time off without pay for a death in the family as
defined above.
Education Support Leave
Please see the university’s webpage dedicated to Education Support Leave.
Military Leave
Please see the university’s webpage dedicated to Military Leave.
Professional Leaves of Absence
Definition and Purpose
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 53
===== PAGE 57 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Professional leaves provide opportunities for scholarly and professional growth that will increase
the value of the recipients’ contributions to the University. These professional leaves may be
granted, upon application, for research, study, field projects, or other similar purposes. During
professional leaves, faculty members should be free from on-going institutional service
responsibilities such as committee assignments and faculty meetings.
The policies for professional leaves do not apply to faculty requests for a semester free from one or
more classroom teaching responsibilities. This released time must have the approval of the
department chair and the dean of the academic unit and is done at their discretion within college
guidelines. If a faculty member requests a semester free from teaching and other responsibilities,
the procedures to be followed for professional leaves apply.
Eligibility
Professional leaves may be granted to persons employed by the University on a full-time basis as
members of the faculty (including eligible counselors and librarians), whose duties include
teaching, research, administration, or the performance of professional services. Because many
faculty members are interested, preference is given to tenured professors or associate professors
who have at least six years of full-time service. Specific questions concerning eligibility for
professional leaves should be referred to the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs.
Impact on Faculty Responsibilities
The granting of a professional leave depends on the unit’s capacity to maintain necessary teaching
schedules and advising responsibilities either by reallocation of work among other faculty
members or, in some cases with justification, through temporary replacements. The granting of a
professional leave should not create undue hardship for other faculty members and should not
unduly limit course offerings. Endorsement by the department chair and dean should be taken to
mean that this criterion is being met.
Impact on Promotion Eligibility
A candidate for promotion who had met the minimum number of years in rank would not be
precluded from being eligible for promotion while absent from the institution on an approved leave
of absence.
Impact on Tenure Eligibility
As with promotion, a candidate who had completed the required probationary period for the award
of tenure would be eligible for consideration for tenure while absent from the university on an
approved leave of absence.
Tenure may be awarded upon completion of five years of full-time service at the rank of assistant
professor or higher. Full-time denotes service on a one-hundred percent workload basis for both
semesters of an academic year. A maximum two-year interruption because of a leave of absence or
part-time services is permitted. However, no probationary credit for the period of an interruption is
allowed.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 54
===== PAGE 58 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Probationary credit of up to three years may be allowed for service in a tenure track position at
another institution, or for full-time service at the rank of instructor at the same institution. Such
credit must be approved by the Board at the time of the initial appointment at the rank of assistant
professor or higher.
Procedure
An applicant must initiate the faculty professional leave request with the chair of the department,
who will forward the application to the dean of that faculty member’s academic unit for
endorsement. If approved, the dean will forward the leave request to the Office of Faculty Affairs for
final approval from the Provost and President. Professional leaves of absence of one year or less
with or without pay may be granted by the President. Extensions of such leaves, or the initial
granting of leaves of more than one year, require the approval of the Chancellor or their designee.
Each applicant should include a prospectus of the projected research or other scholarly activity
and a statement of the requested time period of the leave.
Report Results
A summary report of the activities undertaken during the leave period must be submitted to the
dean of the faculty member’s academic unit and the Provost and Vice President for Academic
Affairs within three months of completion of the leave.
Compensation
Applicants who are granted professional leave at full salary should not accept employment
elsewhere during the leave period. Exceptions to this policy may be made on a case-by-case basis.
A faculty member who is granted a professional leave of absence will be required, before beginning
the leave, to sign an agreement that indicates:
• For a leave with pay of less than one year, the employee will return to the institution at the
termination of the leave for a period of at least one (1) year;
• For a one-year leave with pay, the employee will return to the institution at the termination
of the leave for a period of at least two (2) years; and that,
• If the employee does not return to the institution for the full amount of time specified in the
agreement, the employee will reimburse the institution for the amount of compensation
received while on leave, as well as any other expenses paid by the USG during the leave,
including all benefit costs.
Personal Leaves of Absence
The President of the University may grant personal leaves without pay to members of the
institution’s faculty or administrative staff, which must then be reported to the chancellor.
At the discretion of the President of an institution, personal leave of absence without pay for
periods not to exceed one year may be approved. Such approved personal leave shall allow the
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 55
===== PAGE 59 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
employee the right to elect to continue group insurance benefits. The employee must pay the full
cost for any coverage continued under this provision.
A faculty member running for political office must take a personal, unpaid leave of absence
pursuant to Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.2.18.3.
The effect that the granting of the leave will have on the institution or the particular department will
be taken into consideration. For example, if an individual’s work cannot be handled by other faculty
members and/or if resources are not available for the employment of a substitute, the University is
justified in refusing to recommend that the leave be granted or in deferring action upon the request
for a leave.
When requesting a leave of absence, the faculty member should notify the department chair and
work with the department to complete the request. The chair will send the request to the Dean’s
office for endorsement and the Dean’s office will forward the request to Faculty Affairs for final
approval from the Provost and President.
Employees retain benefits eligibility during unpaid leave, assuming they continue to pay the full
cost of the benefit costs. Employees do not earn paid time off (e.g., sick leave) during unpaid leave
status.
Effects of Leave on Benefits
If a faculty member is granted a personal leave of absence, insurance may be continued under the
same entitlements as if the individual were in active status, so long as the employee pays the full
cost of the group insurance benefit and the insurance premiums are remitted in a timely manner.
The third party benefits administration vendor will bill employees for continuing benefits while the
employee is on leave of absence. The benefits administrator’s billing will begin on the first of the
month following the effective date of the leave of absence.
In the event of leave with less than one-half pay, no service toward retirement is credited. If leave is
with one-half pay or more, service credit is granted, and normal retirement deductions are made
from paychecks. The University continues to pay the employer contributions.
Court Duty
Court duty leave with pay is granted to benefits-eligible faculty for the purpose of serving on a jury
or as a subpoenaed witness. Such leave is granted upon presentation of official documentation
from the court. A receipt from the appropriate court stating the number of days served qualifies as
documentation for serving on a jury.
Employees may retain juror or witness fees paid by the court. An employee serving as an expert
witness must comply with the “Conflict of Interest” policy and other policies guiding outside
activities.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 56
===== PAGE 60 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Voting
Employees of the University are encouraged to exercise their constitutional right to vote in all
federal, state, and local elections. Under Georgia law, if the polls aren’t open at least two hours
before or after the work shift, the employee is entitled to as much as two hours off work to vote in a
local, state, or federal election or primary. The employee must provide the employer reasonable
notice that time off is needed, and the employer may choose any two hours during which the polls
are open.
Mandated Leave
Georgia State University at its discretion may mandate leave that shall be designated as vacation,
furlough leave, or leave without pay. The University shall make every effort to give prior notice
before leave is mandated.
University Closing
In the event of inclement weather or any emergency that jeopardizes the safety of employees, the
President or designee of the University may declare leave with or without pay. The university
community will be notified of such closure, cancellation of classes, or delayed opening through
multiple media.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 57
===== PAGE 61 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Exiting University
Non-Renewal
Non-renewal is governed by the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.3.4.2 and 8.3.4.3.
Dismissal
The University Statutes Article XII, Sections 23 and 24 and Board of Regents Policy Manual
8.3.9 specify the circumstances under which a tenured or non-tenured faculty member may be
dismissed or removed before the end of his/her contract term.
Resignation
As specified in the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.3.4.1, all tenured faculty members employed
under written contract for the fiscal or academic year shall give at least sixty (60) days written
notice of their intention to resign to the president of the institution or to his/her authorized
representative.
Retirement
For system-wide information about eligibility for retirement and retiree eligibility for part-time
reemployment by the USG, faculty should review the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.2.8. Georgia
State University Human Resources provides numerous pre-retirement resources for Georgia State
University employees. Faculty are also encouraged to view the HR Benefits website to view updated
benefits information and seminars pertaining to retirement.
Pay for Accrued Leave
Faculty on twelve month contracts who have accrued leave at the time of termination or retirement
will generally receive a lump sum payment for the accrued leave. Faculty will generally not be kept
on the payroll until their leave is exhausted (Personnel: 2-22-89). Please see the Vacation Payout
section of the Clearance Form in Clearing the University immediately below.
Clearing the University
A Clearance Form for Terminating Faculty and Staff is used by terminating faculty to clear the
university and must be completed prior to the last day of employment. Terminating faculty must
turn library books/fees, purchasing cards, keys, parking cards/decals, etc. in to the appropriate
offices and pay any associated financial obligations before clearance is issued. Faculty should
contact the individual offices listed on the Clearance Form for further clarification. After all
signatures have been obtained, the Clearance Form must be hand carried to the Human Resources
Benefits Office on or near the last working day of employment.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 58
===== PAGE 62 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
COBRA Continuation of Group Health Coverage
Continuing Benefit Plans at Termination
Benefits remain intact until the last day of the month in which the employee terminates. Applicable
premiums must be paid. The cost for COBRA for employees and/or dependents is 100% of the total
premium, plus a 2% administrative fee. Employees are offered continued coverage under the
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) for up to 18 months. In special
instances, the 18-month period may be extended. The election period and duration of coverage is
outlined in the official notice sent by vendor to the former employee’s home address.
COBRA Disabled Status
If a qualified beneficiary is determined to be disabled under Title II or XVI of the Social Security Act
at the time employment ends, the qualified beneficiary may elect continuation for up to twenty-
nine (29) months.
COBRA Dependents
Dependents who lose eligibility may continue coverage for thirty-six (36) months.
Visit the university’s COBRA webpage to learn more.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 59
===== PAGE 63 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Key Employee Policies and Resources
Introduction
As faculty play various roles as educators, supervisors, and participants in hiring, evaluation, and
admissions processes, it is important that they be familiar with relevant laws, policies, procedures,
and resources that govern and support their work. To assist faculty in understanding their rights and
responsibilities, pertinent policies and resources are highlighted below.
Board of Regents' Policy Manual
The Policy Manual of the Board of Regents is the authoritative source of information concerning
Board of Regents’ (BoR) approved policies governing academic and student matters. Faculty
seeking additional information about system-wide policies should review the Board of Regents
Policy Manual 8.2 General Policies for All Personnel and the Board of Regents Policy Manual
Section 8.3 Additional Policies for Faculty.
USG Academic and Student Affairs Handbook
The USG Academic & Student Affairs Handbook is the procedural guide for implementing Board of
Regents policies related to Academic Affairs. The purpose of the handbook is to offer procedural
information for implementing Board policy needed by chief academic officers and chief student
officers of the institutions of the University System of Georgia. Faculty seeking additional
procedural information pertaining to their employment should consult the USG Academic &
Student Affairs Handbook Section 4.0 Academic Personnel.
Employee Handbook
Please see the current employee handbook.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Subsequent Employment Legislation
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits employment discrimination based on race, color,
religion, sex, or national origin. Subsequent employment legislation defines a larger set of such
protected classes. Under federal employment law, it is illegal to discriminate in any aspect of
employment including: Hiring and firing; compensation, assignment, or classification of
employees; transfer, promotion, layoff, or recall; job advertisements; recruitment; testing; use of
company facilities; training and apprenticeship programs; fringe benefits; pay, retirement plans,
and disability leave; or other terms and conditions of employment.
Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
As specified in the Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action Policy, it continues to be the policy of
Georgia State University to implement affirmative action and provide equal opportunity for all
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 60
===== PAGE 64 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
employees, students, contractors, consultants and applicants for employment or admission
without regard to race, color, religion, creed, national origin, sex, age, veteran status or disability.
The University’s affirmative action program and related policies are developed in compliance with
Executive Orders 11246 and 11375, as amended; the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Sections 503 &
504) and the Americans with Disabilities Amendments Act of 2008 (Title II) and their implementing
regulations; the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967; and the Vietnam Era Veterans
Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, as it amends 38 U.S.C. 4212.
In conformance with the federal regulations listed above, Georgia State University does not
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment with regard to any opportunity for
which the employee is qualified.
Persons wishing to file complaints under the provisions of this policy should contact the
Opportunity Development/Diversity Education Planning Office.
Every member of the Georgia State University community is expected to uphold this policy as a
matter of mutual respect and fundamental fairness in human relations. The policy has the
unequivocal support of the Office of the President. All members of the faculty, staff, and student
body are expected to ensure that nondiscriminatory practices are followed at Georgia State
University.
Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action for Individuals with
Disabilities, Disabled Veterans and Veterans of the Vietnam Era Policy
As specified in the Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action for Individuals with
Disabilities, Disabled Veterans and Veterans of the Vietnam Era Policy, it is the policy of Georgia
State University not to discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because he
or she is an individual with a disability, a disabled veteran or a veteran of the Vietnam era. It is also
the policy of Georgia State University to take affirmative action to employ and advance in
employment qualified disabled veterans, veterans of the Vietnam era and individuals with
disabilities. This policy applies to all employment actions including, but not limited to, advertising,
recruitment, hiring, compensation, retention, training, demotion, promotion or transfer, layoff or
termination and tenure. Persons wishing to self-identify as an individual with a disability, disabled
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era or file a complaint should contact the Director of Affirmative
Action at One Park Place South Suite 527, Atlanta, GA 30303-3083, 404-413-2569.
All personnel actions involving individuals with disabilities, disabled veterans and veterans of the
Vietnam era will be governed by the affirmative action programs developed in compliance with 41
CFR Parts 60-741 and 60-250.
In order to ensure compliance, operational responsibility for implementing and monitoring this
policy and maintaining and updating the affirmative action plan for individuals with disabilities,
disabled veterans and veterans of the Vietnam era lies with the Director of Affirmative Action. This
affirmative action plan is available for inspection by any employee or applicant for employment,
during normal business hours, in the Georgia State University Affirmative Action Office located at
Ten Park Place South, Suite 460.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 61
===== PAGE 65 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Every member of the university community is expected to uphold this policy as a matter of mutual
respect and fundamental fairness in human relations. This policy has the unequivocal support of
the Office of the President and all members of the staff, faculty and student body are expected to
ensure that nondiscriminatory practices are followed at Georgia State University.
Individuals with Disabilities
It is the policy of Georgia State University not to discriminate against any individual because he or
she has a disability. This applies to employees and students. It also applies to applicants for
admission or employment.
Georgia State University is an equal opportunity employer. Qualified individuals with disabilities are
welcome as employees at Georgia State. In order to provide equal access and opportunities to
individuals with disabilities, reasonable accommodations may be needed. Employees and their
supervisors should review Georgia State’s ADA Employee Accommodation Policy and Procedure to
become familiar with the process of obtaining and providing reasonable accommodations,
including self-disclosure, request for accommodation, notice given to the employee, discussion of
accommodations, the accommodation agreement, accommodation implementation, and appeals.
Accommodation of Religious Practice
Georgia State University recognizes and respects the religious diversity of its employees. The
University complies with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits employers from
discriminating in any aspect of employment regarding an individual’s sincerely held religious
practice or belief. Employers must accommodate employees’ religious needs, unless it would
cause an undue hardship to University operations. Failure to do so is an unlawful employment
practice.
The obligation to accommodate begins when an employee notifies his/her supervisor and the
Office of Opportunity Development and Diversity Education Planning (ODDEP) of the need for an
accommodation. Once notified, available alternatives for accommodating the religious practice
involved will be considered. If there is more than one alternative available, which would not cause
an undue hardship, the alternative, which would least disadvantage the individual’s employment
opportunities must be offered. The offered accommodation does not have to be the one the
employee prefers, if the above standard (i.e., least disadvantage) is met.
For questions regarding the Religious Accommodation procedure, please contact ODDEP at 1 Park
Place South, Suite 527 Atlanta, GA 30303 or at 404-413-2563 / equalopportunity@gsu.edu.
Sexual Harassment Policy and Sexual Identity Policy
Sexual Harassment Policy
Sexual harassment is prohibited by Georgia State University, the University System of Georgia and
by state and federal law. Sexual harassment is a form of prohibited sex discrimination. Georgia
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 62
===== PAGE 66 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
State University is firmly committed to maintaining a work environment free of sexual harassment
and does so by providing training for all employees explaining the definition of sexual harassment,
how to report sexual harassment and the consequences for sexually harassing a member of the
University community. Sexual harassment of any member of the University community is prohibited
and will subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include termination.
Definition of Sexual Harassment
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission definition, adopted by Georgia State University,
states that unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when:
• submission to such conduct is made explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an
individual’s employment or academic standing; or
• submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as a basis for
employment or academic decisions affecting an individual; or
• such conduct unreasonably interferes with an individual’s work or academic performance
or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive working or academic environment; or
• such conduct that can be implicitly or explicitly categorized under Sex Discrimination, a
prohibited form of Sexual harassment under Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of
1972. Georgia State University will not tolerate any form of harassing behavior to or from
employees, consultants, contractors, or other non-employees.
Reporting Procedures
Any employee who feels that he or she has been the victim of harassment is encouraged to use the
University’s internal procedures to resolve complaints. The supervisor is also responsible to report
any knowledge of harassment. The complainant may elect to use any of three University
procedures. The complainant may consult informally with a counselor (employees contact Faculty
and Staff Assistance), with the University Ombudsperson, or the complainant may submit a formal
complaint with the /Office of AA/EEO Investigations. Complainants should note that informal
resolution through the Ombudspersons Office or Faculty and Staff Assistance does not put the
University on notice of sexual harassment. In instances of sexual misconduct under Title IX, the
Ombudsperson is not a confidential resource.
A counselor from Faculty and Staff Assistance or the Counseling and Testing Center is used when
the complainant desires personal assistance in dealing with a confidential reporting of sexual
harassment, and is outside the University’s mechanism for resolving complaints.
Actions of the Ombudsperson focus on communication, education, and possible resolution.
Formal complaint procedures through the Office of AA/EEO Investigations and Hiring focus on
investigation and resolution. A complainant may use any of the procedures initially, and may move
among them as the situation dictates. Employees may also file harassment complaints with the
appropriate state or federal agencies under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972.
Sexual Identity Policy
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 63
===== PAGE 67 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
It is the policy of Georgia State University that an individual’s sexual identity will not be considered
when making any personnel decisions. One’s sexual identity is strictly personal, and such
information is prohibited from being used in any way by the University or its employees in
employment decisions.
Resources for Crisis and Conflict
Faculty and Staff Assistance Program
Faculty experiencing crisis or stressful situations are encouraged to use Georgia State
University’s Faculty and Staff Assistance program. FASA is a free and confidential service. Issues
that are frequently addressed through FASA include:
• Marital problems
• Job stress or dissatisfaction
• Communication
• Family disharmony
• Substance abuse
• Personality conflict
• Lack of direction in career
• Financial difficulties
Faculty and Staff Assistance (FASA) is an internal Employee Assistance Program (EAP), providing
broad brush services including confidential consultations, short-term counseling, assessment and
referrals. These services are part of the benefits offered to Georgia State employees and eligible
dependents. FASA services include individual management consultation services to those in
supervisory roles, support for individual or departmental crisis, training, outplacement and career
services, and relapse prevention services.
Emergency assistance is available for crisis situations 24 hours a day, 7 days a week through (404)
413-3357. For non-emergency situations, reach FASA at (404) 413-3342 or fasa@gsu.edu.
Office of the Ombudsperson
Faculty experiencing conflict are encouraged to contact the Office of the Ombudsperson at (404)
413-2510. The Ombudsperson is a confidential resource for all persons on campus. The goal of the
ombudsperson is to advocate, not for a specific individual, but for equity, fair processes, and
compliance with university policy and procedure. Ombuds act as complaint receivers for persons
who believe they have been treated unfairly, coaches to help persons independently resolve
difficult situation and as facilitators or mediators in an effort to assist persons in conflict to reach
fair resolutions. In a neutral and impartial role, the Office of the Ombudsperson assists all
members of the University community in problem solving and the resolution of complaints, while
coordinating programs and promoting alternatives to adversarial processes. The office aims to
ensure civil and equitable treatment for all students, faculty, and staff by providing awareness of
university policy and procedure and recommending appropriate institutional action or change. For
more information on the Office of the Ombudsperson, faculty can go to ombuds.gsu.edu.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 64
===== PAGE 68 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Relevant Policies
Faculty experiencing conflict should also review the informal and formal conflict resolution
procedures outlined in the University Statutes (see Faculty Grievance Policy immediately below).
Discrimination or Harassment Complaint Process
Please see Discrimination or Harassment Complaint Process below.
Faculty Grievance Policy
The faculty grievance policy is available at PolicyStat through the link here.
Discrimination or Harassment Complaint Process
Georgia State University is committed to creating and maintaining a community in which students,
faculty and staff can work together in an atmosphere free of discrimination, harassment and/or
retaliation. The University encourages Complainants to avail themselves of counseling services
prior to and during the pursuit of informal and formal procedures. On campus providers of these
services include but are not limited to the Office of the Ombudsperson, FASA, Access and
Accommodations Center, Dean of Students, and University Counseling Center.
The Investigations unit of Equity & Civil Rights Compliance (ECRC) serves as a resource for
potential complainants and provides an investigatory function for discrimination complaints. One
of the responsibilities of the department is to uphold the federal and state laws that prohibit
discrimination in education and employment. It is illegal to discriminate against a person because
of that person’s national origin, race, color, sex, religion, age, veteran status or disability.
Informal Resolution Process
Employees are encouraged to participate in an informal resolution process. The informal resolution
process may be utilized by consulting with Faculty and Staff Assistance, Employee Relations, or the
University’s Ombudsperson as the situation dictates.
In the event that any of these processes are not successful, the employee may initiate a formal
complaint through Equity & Civil Rights Compliance.
Formal Complaint Process
To begin the formal complaint process, the employee must contact ECRC. The initial intake
interview serves the purpose of establishing that the complainant is currently affiliated with
Georgia State University and that the complaint involves an illegal basis of discrimination,
harassment and/or retaliation in regards to a protected activity. If the alleged facts do not constitute
a basis of discrimination prohibited by law, informal resolution options or grievance procedures are
still available to the employee.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 65
===== PAGE 69 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Employees are encouraged to notify the Investigations unit of Equity & Civil Rights Compliance of
claims of discrimination and /or harassment as soon as possible. However, because of the statute
of limitations on such claims and witness availability, a discrimination complaint must be filed
within 180 days of the occurrence of the alleged violation. In cases where discrimination is
continued and ongoing employee should contact ECRC as soon as possible.
For detailed information on the Investigations unit of Equity & Civil Rights Compliance and the
formal complaint process, visit https://ecrc.gsu.edu/investigations-and-hiring/.
Equity & Civil Rights Compliance (ECRC) & Title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972
Equity & Civil Rights Compliance (ECRC) supports Georgia State’s commitment to inclusive
excellence by ensuring compliance with federal, state, and local civil rights laws and regulations
prohibiting discrimination, harassment and retaliation for engaging in protected activity, as well as
federal affirmative action and equal employment opportunity requirements.
ECRC fulfills this mission via policy development, implementation, and enforcement; investigation
of complaints and potential policy violations, oversight of related procedures and the proactive
provision of education and guidance to the university community.
ECRC also houses the university’s Title IX Coordinator and Americans With Disabilities Act/Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 Coordinator. The Title IX Coordinator is responsible for
coordinating the university’s compliance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, a
federal statute prohibiting discrimination and harassment based on sex in education programs or
activities that receive federal financial assistance.
Ethics Policy and Ethics Training
The University System of Georgia Ethics Policy is central to faculty members’ upholding of
Professional Standards at Georgia State University. In order to ensure that all actively employed
University System of Georgia (USG) employees are cognizant of and adhering to their obligations
with respect to the USG Ethics Policy, all individuals employed by the USG or one of its institutions
in any capacity shall participate in USG Ethics Policy training, and shall certify compliance with the
USG Ethics Policy on a periodic basis. Georgia State University’s Initial Ethics Course and Refresher
Ethics can be accessed through iCollege from the Human Resources Ethics Training webpage.
The USG Ethics Policy governs only official conduct performed by or on behalf of the USG.
Violations of the USG Ethics Policy may result in disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
Employment of Relatives
The employment of relatives at Georgia State University is governed by the Board of Regents Policy
Manual 8.2.3. For the purpose of this policy, relatives are defined as husbands and wives, parents
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 66
===== PAGE 70 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
and children, brothers, sisters, and any in-laws of any of the foregoing (BoR Minutes, February 14,
1973, p. 312).
The basic criteria for the appointment and promotion of USG employees shall be appropriate
qualifications and performance as set forth in the policies of the Board of Regents. Relationship by
a family or marriage shall constitute neither an advantage nor a disadvantage.
No individual shall be employed in a department or unit that will result in the existence of a
subordinate-superior relationship between such individual and any relative of such individual
through any line of authority. As used herein, “line of authority” shall mean authority extending
vertically through one or more organizational levels of supervision or management (BoR Minutes,
1989-90, p. 250).
This standard does not apply to the temporary or part-time employment of children under age 25,
nor to any individual employed as of February 14, 1990, at any institution where a relative of such
individual then holds a superior position at least one level of supervision removed from such
individual in any line of authority. Exceptions may be approved by the Board of Regents upon
recommendation of the Chancellor as being clearly in the best interest of the institution and the
USG.
Amorous Relationships
Georgia State University’s Policy on Amorous Relationships prohibits the parties who are or have
been involved in any amorous relationship from evaluating each other.
As specified in the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.2.18.6, “A USG faculty or staff member,
including a graduate teaching assistant, is prohibited from having an amorous relationship with any
student who the faculty or staff member supervises, teaches, or evaluates in any way. Consistent
with Policy 8.2.3, a USG employee is prohibited from having an amorous relationship with any other
employee if either employee supervises, evaluates, or in any other way directly affects the terms or
conditions of the other’s employment. Any individual who violates this policy is subject to
disciplinary action commensurate with the offense, up to and including termination.”
Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment
Please see the university policy on Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment.
Outside Activity
Faculty engagement in outside activities is governed by Georgia State’s Conflict of Interest and
Conflict of Commitment Policy, the University Statutes Article XII Section 10, and Board of Regents
Policy Manual 8.2.18.2. Faculty are encouraged to read and familiarize themselves with these
policies.
As specified in the Statutes, “No members of the faculty of the University shall engage in any
outside work or activity if it interferes with the regular and punctual discharge of their official
university duties and responsibilities.”
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 67
===== PAGE 71 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Georgia State’s Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment Policy further specifies that “Full
Time University Employees are required to receive advance approval before engaging in certain
external activities, including but not limited to consulting, teaching, speaking, and participating in
business or service enterprise, and are restricted from engaging in certain other external activities.
While the Board of Regents’ Policy on Outside Activity provides certain limits on external activities,
a Full Time University Employee’s Supervisor has the discretion to determine that external activities
otherwise permitted under the Board of Regents’ Policy on Outside Activity are inappropriate in
scope and duration or constitute excessive time away from University duties. Practical
considerations necessitate a limit of not more than one day a week average for the aggregate of all
outside activities when the employee is being paid for Full Time duty.”
Faculty are expected to follow the disclosure procedure outlined in the Conflict of Interest and
Conflict of Commitment Policy: “Prior to engaging in an external professional, service or
commercial activity, including consulting, teaching, speaking, and participating in business or
service enterprises, other than pre-approved activities, a Full Time University Employee shall
provide written notification of such proposed activity to his or her Supervisor (an “Outside Activity
Notification”) in the manner requested by the Supervisor. Supervisors may provide Full Time
University Employees under their supervision with a list of pre-approved activities that do not need
to be disclosed pursuant to this paragraph.” For additional procedural and policy information,
please see the entire Conflict of Interest and Conflict of Commitment Policy.
Use of GSU Resources
The use of Georgia State University resources is governed by the Conflict of Interest and Conflict of
Commitment Policy. Section VI Conflicts of Interest, subsection on Use of University Resources
specifies that “The University’s name, letterhead, facilities, services (including the time and
assistance of University staff, faculty or students), electronic resources, and equipment are to be
used for the furtherance of University goals and not for the benefit of, or to imply the University’s
support of, a non-University activity.
University Employees may not use University facilities, resources, equipment or services in
connection with any outside employment or consulting or other non-University activity except in a
purely incidental way or as provided below.
In certain situations, subject to the other restrictions of this Policy, other University policies and
procedures and state law, a University Employee or a commercial entity in which a University
Employee has a Financial Interest may access University facilities or equipment on the same terms
as such facilities or equipment are available to persons or organizations outside of the
University. Arrangements for reimbursing the University must be made prior to using the
University’s facilities or equipment for outside activities. The reimbursement plan will include costs
consistent with rates charged to outside groups or persons.”
Professional Travel
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 68
===== PAGE 72 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Faculty members are required to file a Travel Authorization – Employee Form for trips in connection
with University duties whether or not they are to be reimbursed. Travel Authorization forms should
be submitted two weeks prior to the departure date.
Travel at state expense is expected to result in professional improvement for faculty members and
should be of benefit to the University. In addition to submitting the Travel Authorization – Employee
Form at least two weeks in advance, a faculty member traveling at state expense must complete
a Travel Expense Statement Form upon his or her return and submit it with all receipts. The faculty
member should make and retain copies of receipts before submission.
Faculty considering travel to a country for which the U.S. Department of State has issued a travel
warning need to review and follow the procedures specified in the university policy on travel to
countries with travel warnings.
Faculty planning to travel using sponsored funds should review the resources and policies available
through URSA’s Purchasing and Travel on Sponsored Awards.
Travel advances are possible under current travel regulations. In addition to the requirements
listed, all faculty must present a proper Georgia State University photo ID card.
Speaking on Behalf of the University
Employees should not use the University name, logo, or insignia to endorse or promote any
product, opinion, cause, or political candidate. Personal opinions represented as institutionally
endorsed is strictly prohibited. Public Relations and Marketing Communications is available to
assist with media requests and training for faculty.
Social Media
Georgia State University recognizes the advances in technology and the benefits of these advances:
one advance being Social Media. While the use of Social Media can be very beneficial to the
promotion, marketing, and advancement of Georgia State University, the abuse and/or misuse of
this technology can be counterproductive and damaging to the mission, vision, and image of the
institution. As a result, it is important to communicate expectations around how Social Media
should be used at Georgia State University. The following are guidelines for Social Media usage at
Georgia State University. The absence or lack of explicit reference to a specific site does not limit
the extent of the application of these guidelines. Where no guidelines exist, employees should
consult with their supervisor and/or the office of Employee Relations if they are uncertain or have
questions concerning appropriate use. Any employee in violation may be subject to disciplinary
action, up to and including termination.
Productivity
Social Media activities should not interfere with work commitments or negatively impact
productivity. As stated in the IS&T policies, University computers and work time are to be used for
University related business. Employees should engage in Social Media activity only if it is directly
related to accomplishing work goals.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 69
===== PAGE 73 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Unauthorized Use of GSU’s Name, Logo, or Insignia
The Georgia State University logo is a registered trademark protected by Federal law. University
logos, services, and other trademarks may only be used on official University websites and pages.
Such use shall be in a way that brings value to the University and portrays Georgia State University
in a positive light. Use of the University name and marks must also comply with the University
Identity Guide. Logos sized appropriately for the web are available for download by request at the
University Identity Guidelines link. Any usage not following the visual identity guidelines must be
immediately removed.
Endorsements
Employees should not use the University name, logo, or insignia to endorse or promote any
product, opinion, cause, or political candidate. Personal opinions represented as institutionally
endorsed is strictly prohibited.
Representation
Employees should not represent Georgia State University or speak on behalf of their
college/unit/department on Social Media, unless written approval is given by their immediate
supervisor.
Confidentiality and Personal Information
Employees should not post any material that would infringe on the intellectual property or privacy
rights of the University or others. This applies to confidential or proprietary information belonging to
the University, including personal information pertaining to students, employees, or alumni.
Employees should adhere to all applicable University privacy and confidentiality policies as well as
State and Federal laws.
Social Media Referencing
Employees should not reference or cite Georgia State University faculty, staff, students, donors,
etc. without their express consent.
Attribution
Employees should respect copyright laws and reference or cite sources appropriately. Plagiarism
applies on-line as well. All posts shall comply with copyright, fair use, and all other applicable State
and Federal Laws.
Recommendations for Posting as an Individual
Employees should not represent themselves as an agent of Georgia State University, while
communicating on a personal blog, forum, or social networking site. Any personal blogs or
comments on Social Media outlet, that could be construed to reflect negatively on Georgia State
University should have clear disclaimers that the views expressed by the author are the author’s
alone and do not represent the views of Georgia State University. Employees should always post
honest and accurate content.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 70
===== PAGE 74 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Computer Usage and Open Records Law
Georgia State University equipment, including computer hardware and software, are valuable
assets. They should be used for official Georgia State University business only. Although every effort
is made to secure the information of each authorized user, messages and/or files stored on the
computer or system network should not be considered to be private and/or secure. Under the
Georgia Open Records law, it is possible that information which is stored on a computer system,
including electronic mail, would be available for inspection by any member of the public. Further,
Georgia State University reserves the right to have access to any information stored on a University
owned computer or network. Under no circumstances may software be copied or installed on a
Georgia State University computer if such copying or installation would violate any copyright or
licensing agreement. All system users are expected to follow the guidelines outlined in the Georgia
State University Information Systems Ethics Policy. Any employee in violation of this policy may be
subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination, as well as possible legal action.
Sending blanket emails to the University is prohibited. This policy includes, but is not limited to the
following types of computers: desktops, laptops, palmtops, notebooks, netbooks, and iPads.
User Responsibilities
All employees are expected to use university IT resources in a responsible manner, as well as use IT
resources for which an employee is authorized. Therefore, it is a violation for an employee to:
• Use resources he/she has not been specifically authorized to use;
• Use someone else’s account and password or share his/her account and password with
someone else;
• Access files, data, processes, or systems without authorization;
• Release a virus or worm that damages or harms a system or network;
• Send email that may cause problems and disrupt service for other users;
• Corrupt or misuse information;
• Alter or destroy information without authorization;
• Download, use or distribute copyrighted materials, including pirated software, music,
videos, or games;
• Upload, download, distribute, or possess pornography;
• Use computing or network resources for advertising or commercial purposes, except as
approved by the University;
• Intercept or monitor any network communications not intended for the employee;
• Use access other than for official duties;
• Use access after transfer or termination, except as stipulated by the University; or
• Use electronic resources for harassment or stalking other individuals.
For more information, see USG IT Handbook, Section 5.1.
User Responsibilities for Personal Devices
Employees who use their personally-owned devices to access Georgia State University data and
information must make every attempt to safeguard confidential, sensitive, and protected
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 71
===== PAGE 75 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
information. If employees use their personal devices for University-related business, employees are
expected to follow the guidelines under User Responsibilities.
Several additional Georgia State Information Systems and Technology Policies pertain to faculty
work spanning teaching and student interaction, research, and other professional duties. For
faculty convenience, Technology Services provides a concise introduction to such policies through
its Information System Policies Chart.
IT Support
Faculty can take advantage of a wide range of Technology Services, including training, email,
software, network, wireless, and telephone services. The Technology Services HelpDesk provides
faculty multiple forms of assistance for a variety of technology issues. Email requests for IT help
should be sent to help@gsu.edu. Faculty can also browse Technology Services’ Faculty Resources
webpage to become more familiar with the range of services and resources applicable to faculty
work generally. Please see Section 300 for technology resources specific to teaching and Section
400 for technology resources specific to research, scholarship, and creative activity.
Political Activity and Candidacy
Georgia State University employees may share their own views on political issues. It is important,
however, that they do so only in their personal capacities, and that it is done in a way that does not
interfere with work, does not involve improper use of state resources and does not create the
appearance that the employee is speaking on behalf of the USG or its institutions. In addition,
under no circumstances may employees use any state property, resources, or materials in
conjunction with any political campaigning.
Additional restrictions on USG employees’ holding political office, managing political campaigns, or
entering political campaigns are outlined in the Board of Regents Policy Manual 8.2.18.3.
Questions about political activities should be addressed to Georgia State University’s Office of
Government and Community Affairs at (404) 413-2030.
Alcohol and Drug Policy
Please see the university’s policy on Alcohol and Other Drugs.
Smoking Policy
Georgia State University promotes a clean, healthy, productive and safe environment for all
students, faculty, staff, and visitors.
Smoking and tobacco use, of any kind, is prohibited on all University owned and/or leased
locations/premises; all internal and external areas; all parking garages and parking lots; and in all
Georgia State owned and/or leased vehicles. Smoking is also prohibited within 25-feet of all Georgia
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 72
===== PAGE 76 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
State building entrances and exits. University Housing will designate limited exterior
smoking/tobacco use areas within the grounds of residential facilities.
The University reserves the right to initiate disciplinary procedures against any individual found to
be in continuous violation of this policy; however all faculty, staff, and students have a collective
responsibility to promote the safety and health of the campus community and therefore share in
the responsibility of enforcement. Individuals observed smoking/using tobacco are to be reminded
in a professional and courteous manner of this policy.
GSU Employee Development and Wellness Services offers a Tobacco Cessation Program for faculty
and staff in need of assistance.
Violence and Dangerous Weapons in the Workplace
Possession of Dangerous Weapons/Workplace Violence
Georgia State University is committed to creating and maintaining a working, learning, and social
environment that is free from danger and violence for all members of the University community.
Possession of Dangerous Weapons
University employees, who are licensed to carry a handgun, are allowed to carry only in a
concealed manner on certain property owned or leased by the University. Other weapons and other
types of guns are not permitted on property owned or leased by the University. University Police
Officers are specifically exempted from this prohibition.
Concealed Weapons
A concealed weapon is defined as “carried in such a fashion that does not actively solicit the
attention of others and is not prominently, openly, and intentionally displayed except for the
purpose of the defense of self or others.” A licensed holder may carry a handgun that is:
1.) covered by an article of clothing the employee is wearing, 2) contained within a bag of a non-
descript nature, or 3) carried in another similar manner that generally keeps it out of the view of
others.
Exceptions to Where Concealed Weapons May be Carried
There are a number exceptions that limit the places on campus where handguns may be carried.
Licensed gun holders may not carry a handgun into the following locations owned or leased by the
University:
• Buildings and property used for athletic sporting events, including stadiums, gymnasiums
and similar facilities in which intercollegiate games are staged;
• Student housing facilities including residence halls and similar buildings where students
live such as fraternity and sorority houses;
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 73
===== PAGE 77 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
• Spaces – including any room, continuous collection of rooms or outdoor facility – that are
used for preschool or childcare;
• Rooms and other spaces during the times when they are being used for classes in which
high school students are enrolled, whether through dual enrollment and programs such as
Move On When Ready or through college and career academies or other specialized
programs such as Early College. Licensed holders, who want to carry handguns to class will
need to visit the institution’s registrar or other designated employee, who after verifying their
enrollment status will tell them which of their classes, if any, have high school students
enrolled. It is the responsibility of licensed holders to seek out this information and make
themselves aware of which classrooms fall within the exception;
• Faculty, staff and administrative offices. This exception includes offices and office suites
occupied by faculty, staff, and administrators, but does not include more general public
common spaces outside of those areas; and
• Rooms during the times when they are being used for disciplinary proceedings of any kind,
including those regarding students, faculty or staff. These would include any meetings or
hearings that are part of the University’s sexual misconduct, student conduct, dispute
resolution, grievance, appeals, or similar processes.
The burden is on licensed holders to know, understand, and follow University policies and the law
regarding concealed handguns. Employees should contact the Georgia State University Police if
someone is carrying a weapon in an unauthorized area. Violation of these policies can result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination and expulsion from the University. For more
information, employees may go to https://safety.gsu.edu/campus-carry/.
Firearms and Dangerous Weapons Defined
Firearms and dangerous weapons include, but are not limited to, the following:
• Pistol, revolver, or any weapons designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind,
including air soft, paintball, BB or pellet guns, potato guns, and other such homemade
devices;
• Dirk, bowie knife, switchblade, ballistic knife, or any other knife having a blade of two or
more inches;
• Straight-edge razor or razor blades;
• Spring stick, metal knucks, blackjacks;
• Bat, club, or other bludgeon-type weapon;
• Nun chahka, nun chuck, nunchaku, shuriken, or fighting chain; and
• Throwing star or oriental dart.
Workplace Violence
The University is committed to providing a safe workplace free from violence, threats of violence, or
disruptive behavior of a violent or threatening nature. The University does not tolerate behavior,
whether direct, indirect, or through the use of university facilities, property, or resources that:
• Is violent;
• Threatens violence;
• Harasses or intimidates others;
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 74
===== PAGE 78 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
• Interferes with an individual’s legal rights of movement or expression; or
• Disrupts the workplace, the academic environment, or the University’s ability to provide
service to the public and/or its students, faculty, or staff.
Violent or threatening behavior can include, but is not limited to: physical acts, oral or written
statements, harassing email messages, harassing telephone calls, bullying, or behaviors such as
stalking.
Individuals who engage in violent behavior, including but not limited to physical attacks,
intimidation, bullying, threats, or property damage, may be removed from the premises, and be
subject to dismissal or other disciplinary action, up to termination, arrest and/or criminal
prosecution.
Violence in the workplace includes relationship violence that intrudes into the workplace,
endangering a person in the relationship or others in the workplace.
This policy applies to all Georgia State University work locations and campuses including offices,
classrooms, worksites, vehicles, parking decks, and field locations.
Workplace is defined as any location, either permanent or temporary, where an employee performs
any work-related duty. This includes, but is not limited to, the buildings and the surrounding
perimeters, including the parking lots, field locations, alternate work locations, and travel to and
from work assignments.
If an employee has been confronted with a violent incident, the employee is to report such incident
to the University Police at (404) 413-3333 immediately. Employees should also inform Employee
Relations at (404) 413-3356 during business hours and Faculty and Staff Assistance at
(404) 413-3357 for an emergency or (404) 413-3345 during non-business hours.
Each employee has a duty to warn University Police first and then Human Resources and his/her
supervisor, if he/she is aware of or believes that workplace violence is imminent that involves
employees, former employees, students, or visitors. This duty extends, for example, to threats, acts
of violence, aggressive behavior, or threatening or offensive acts or comments. All employee
reports made pursuant to this policy will be held in confidence, to the maximum extent possible.
Duty to Report Criminal Charges and Determinations
Employees have the responsibility to report criminal charges/determinations.
Criminal Charges
An employee of Georgia State University who is charged with a crime (other than a minor traffic
offense and/or local ordinance violation) shall report having been charged to his/her supervisor
within 3 days of becoming aware of such charge. The employee shall report the crime(s) he/she has
been charged with and provide documentation of the charges upon request.
Criminal Determinations
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 75
===== PAGE 79 =====
As of October 16, 2025 600. Personnel Policies and Benefits
Within 3 days of receiving notice from the employee, the supervisor will contact the Office of Legal
Affairs and Employee Relations so a determination can be made as to what action, if any, is
immediately warranted. Within 3 days of the employee receiving a determination of the criminal
charges (e.g. charges dismissed, allowed to plead nolo contendere, found guilty, acquitted), he/she
will notify his/her supervisor and provide documentation of the disposition. Within 3 days of
receiving notice from the employee, the supervisor will contact the Office of Legal Affairs and
Employee Relations so a determination can be made as to what action, if any, is warranted. Failure
to report under this policy may result in disciplinary action, including termination of employment.
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 76
===== PAGE 80 =====
As of October 16, 2025 INDEX
INDEX
Academic Advising, 24 Civil Rights Act of 1964, 60
Academic Calendars, 17 Class Rolls, 19
Academic Freedom, 8 Classrooms and Classroom Management, 29
Academic Honesty, 28 Clearing the University, 58
Academic Support Services, 31 COBRA, 59
Accessible Course Materials, 18 Compensation, 47
Adding and Dropping Classes, 20 During Professional Leave of Absence, 55
Administrator reviews, 12 Gifts and Gratuities, 48
Affirmative Action, 60 Policies, 47
Alcohol and Drug Policy, 72 Workers' Compensation, 49
Amorous Relationships, 67 Compliance and Safety Resources
Annual Evaluations, 11 (Research), 37
Appointments, 42 Complimentary Textbooks, 19
Adjunct Appointments, 43 Computer Usage and Open Records Law, 71
Courtesy Appointments, 43 Conference Travel (Research), 39
Dual Appointments, 43 Conflict of Interest and Conflict of
Limited-Term Appointments, 43 Commitment, 67
Part-Time Appointments, 43 Contracts, 44
Attendance Academic Year Contracts, 44
Faculty Attendance, 23 Fiscal Year Contracts, 44
Student Attendance, 20 Cooperative Education and Internships, 35
Auditing a Class Copyright
Faculty, 49 Use of Copyrighted Works in Education and
Students, 21 Research, 18
Awards Management, 37 Counseling Services, 31
Benefits Course Modality, 34
COBRA, 59 Course Reserves, 19
Effects of Leave, 56 Court Duty, 56
Eligibility, 46 Crisis & Conflict Resources, 64
Enrollment, 46 Curriculum, 16
Faculty Auditing Courses, 49 Approval, 16
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), 53 Catalogs, 16
Insurance Premium Payment during Graduate Programs, 16
Summer and Non-Pay Status, 47 Death in the Family, 53
Sick Leave, 52 Disabled Students Accommodation (ADA), 22
Tuition Assistance, 49 Discrimination or Harassment Complaint
Vacation/Annual Leave, 51 Process, 65
Workers' Compensation and Work-Related Dismissal, 58
Injuries, 49 Disruptive Student Conduct, 28
Bereavement Leave, 53 Distinguished University Professorships, 14
Career Services, 32 Duty to Report Criminal Charges and
Center for Excellence in Teaching, Learning, Determinations, 75
and Online Education (CETLOE), 29 Education Support Leave, 53
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 77
===== PAGE 81 =====
As of October 16, 2025 INDEX
Emergency Procedures, 35 Insurance Premium Payment during Summer
Emeriti Status, 15 and Non-Pay Status, 47
Employment of Relatives, 66 Jury Duty, 56
Endowed Academic Positions, 14 Learning Outcomes, 27
Equal Employment Opportunity, 60 Leaves and Absences, 51
Individuals with Disabilities, Disabled Court and Jury Duty, 56
Veterans and Veterans of the Vietnam Death in the Family, 53
Era, 61 Education Support Leave, 53
Equity & Civil Rights Compliance, 66 Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), 53
Ethics Policy and Ethics Training, 66 Military Leave, 53
Evaluation Official Paid Holidays, 51
Student Evaluation of Instruction, 27 Pay for Accrued Leave, 58
Evaluations Personal, 55
Administrator Reviews, 12 Professional, 53
Annual, 11 Shared Sick Leave, 53
Department Chairs, 13 Sick Leave, 52
Student Evaluation of Instruction, 27 Vacation/Annual Leave, 51
Examinations, 24 Voting, 57
Final Exams, 24 Library
Testing Services for Faculty, 25 Physical and Electronic Course Reserves,
Faculty Attendance, 23 19
Faculty Grievance Policy, 65 Research Services, 38
Faculty Workloads, 10 Student Services, 32
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), 53 Mandated Leave, 57
FERPA, 22 Military Leave, 53
Final Exam Schedules, 17 Mission & Background, 1
Final Exams, 24 Nepotism, 66
Financial Aid, 33 Non-Renewal, 58
Gifts and Gratuities, 48 Office Hours, 23
Governance, 3 Online Courses, 34
Grading, 26 Outside Activity, 67
Graduate Student Supervision, 28 Part-Time Employment Beyond Retirement,
Grievances, 65 15
H-1B Visas, 42 Pay for Accrued Leave, 58
Hiring, 42 Personal Leaves of Absence, 55
Criminal Background Checks (Background Personnel Files, 44
Investigation Policy & Procedure), 42 Political Activity and Candidacy, 72
Policy, 42 Postdoctoral Research Assistants, 40
Sponsorship for U.S. Permanent Resident Professional Leaves of Absence, 53
Status & H-1B Specialty Occupation, 42 Professional Standards, 8
History of the University, 1 Professional Travel, 68
Holidays, 51 Promotion and/or Tenure Policies, 12
Hybrid Courses, 34 Proposal Writing (Research), 38
iCollege (Learning Management System), 29 Ranks, 5
Information Systems and Technology Adjunct Faculty, 7
Policies, 23 Full-Time Faculty, 5
Institutional Research, 39 Part-Time Faculty, 6
Instructional Technology, 29 Part-Time Instructors, 6
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 78
===== PAGE 82 =====
As of October 16, 2025 INDEX
Transferring from Tenure-Track to Non- Sexual Harassment Policy and Sexual Identity
Tenure Track, 6 Policy, 62
Records Shared Sick Leave Program, 53
Open Records Act, 71 Sick Leave, 52
Personnel, 44 Signature Experience Courses, 34
Pre-Employment, 42 Smoking Policy, 72
Retention and Destruction of Student Social Media, 69
Work, 23 Speaking on Behalf of the University, 69
Student Records and FERPA, 22 Sponsored Proposals & Awards, Office of, 37
Regents' Professors, 14 Student Academic Complaints, Petitions, and
Religious Holidays Accommodation, 20 Appeals, 27
Research Student Attendance, 20
Animal Care & Use, 40 Student Code of Conduct, 28
Award Management, 37 Student Conduct, 28
Bio-, Chemical and Radiation Safety, 40 Academic Honesty, 28
Centers, 39 Code of Conduct, 28
Compliance and Safety Resources, 37 Disruptive Student Conduct, 28
Computing & Technology, 38 Student Records
Conduct, 40 FERPA, 22
Conference Travel, 39 Retention and Destruction of Student
External Funding, 36 Work, 23
Human Subjects, 40 Student Registration and Attendance, 19
Institutional Data Access, 39 Student Services, 31
Institutional Review Board (IRB), 40 Advisement and Academic Support
Internal Funding, 36 Services, 31
Laboratory & Environmental Safety, 40 Career Services, 32
Library Services, 38 Counseling Services, 31
Misconduct, 40 Faculty Role/Referrals, 31
Openness, 40 Financial Aid and Grants, 33
Policies, 40 Library Services for Students, 32
Postdocs, 40 Student Campus Life Services, 31
Proposal Development & Submission, 37 Supplemental Instruction, 32
Workshops and Online Training, 38 Testing Services, 32
Resignation, 58 Study Abroad, 34
Retirement Supplemental Instruction, 32
Benefits, 50 Syllabus Policy, 16
Clearing the University, 58 Testing Services, 32
Emeriti Status, 15 Testing Services for Faculty, 25
Part-Time Employment After, 15 Textbooks, 18
Roles and Responsibilities of Faculty Title IX, 66
Members, 8 Title VII, 60
Sabbatical, 53 University Closing, 57
Self-Authored Instructional Materials, 18 University System of Georgia and the Board of
Service, 41 Regents, 1
Compensation Policies, 47 Use of GSU Resources, 68
Expectations, 41 Vacation/Annual Leave, 51
Service Learning, 34 Violence and Dangerous Weapons in the
Workplace, 73
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 79
===== PAGE 83 =====
As of October 16, 2025 INDEX
Voting, 57 Assessment of Student Learning
Withdrawal from Class, 20 Outcomes, 27
Workers' Compensation and Work-Related Center for Excellence in Teaching,
Injuries, 49 Learning, and Online Education
Working with Graduate Students, 28 (CETLOE), 29
Workshops Counseling Services (Students), 32
Georgia State University Faculty Handbook 80